Corporate Social Responsibility:
Studying the Sugar Production
Process in Pakistan
Published by
Prakruthi
43, 2nd Cross, Ramaya Layout
St. Thomas Town Post
Kammanahalli
Bangalore 560 084, India
www.prakruthi.org
Supported by
The Netherlands
Oxfam Novib
Design and Layout by Rajesh MV
Printed at National Printing Press, Bangalore
© 2012, Edition - first
ISBN: 978-81-908155-9-8
Author: Anam Anwar Khan, SDPI, Pakistan
Research Co-ordinator: Qasim Ali Shah, SDPI, Pakistan
Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
1. Concept of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)

I.
CSR

II.
CSR in the Region

2. Methodology

I.
Assumptions

II.
Value-chain Analysis

3. An Overview

I.
Production Process

II.
National Sugar Policy 2009-2010

III.
Competition Commission of Pakistan (CCP)

IV.
Pakistan Sugar Mills Association (PSMA)

V.
Farmers and Mills

VI.
Farmers and Government

VII. Consumers

4. The Sugar Sector

I.
CSR Awareness

II.
Laws Regarding CSR

III.
Barriers and Implementation

IV.
Reporting and Auditing

V.
Year 2007-08

VI.
Pricing and Quality

VII. Payment to Farmers

VIII. Ensuring Supply of Sugarcane

IX.
Delaying the Crushing

X.
Weighing the Crop

XI.
The Crop: Seeds and Fugicides

XII. Agents, Dealers and Contractors
XIII. ‘Gur’

XIV. Zoning and De-zoning

XV. Accessibility

XVI. By-products

XVII. Research and Development

5. Way Forward

I.
Soil

II.
Water

III.
By-products

IV.
Fertilizers

Barriers Expected

The Government

The Civil Society

The Corporate Sector

Annex 1: Questionnaire for the Sugar Mill Managers

Annex 2: Questionnaire for Competition Commission

Annex 3: Questionnaire for PSMA

Annex 4: Questionnaire for Farmers

Annex 5: Questionnaire for End Users

List of Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Value Chain Linkages in the Sugar Industry

Figure 2: Pictures taken of Raw Sugar at Khazana Sugar Mill, Peshawar
Figure 3: Huge Stocks of Sugar Bags at Mills Waiting to be Dispatched
 at Higher Prices

Figure 4: Industrial Alcohol Produced at Sugar Mills

Figure 5: By-product (Mud) Extraction at a Sugar Mill

Table 1: Area Under Important Crops

Table 2: Production of Important Crops

Table 3: Crop wise Composition of Value of Major Agriculture Crops

Table 4: Yield per Hectare of Major Agriculture Crops

Table 5: Pakistan Sugarcane Area and Yield
Table 6: Procurement/Support Prices of Agriculture Commodities

Table 7: Sugarcane Production and Recovery

Acronyms
BISP
Benazir Income Support Program
CSR
CCP
Competition Commission of Pakistan
FBR
Federal Board of Revenue, Government of Pakistan
Government
Government of Pakistan
MINFA
Ministry of Food and Agriculture
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
PSMA
Pakistan Sugar Mills Association
TCP
Trading Corporation of Pakistan
USC
Utility Stores Corporation
Executive Summary
Corporate Social Responsibility is a concept newly emerging globally. The idea is
rapidly spreading over the corporate sector; many firms have instated Corporate
Social Responsibility (CSR) strategies in their long-term plans. These strategies
are not just social welfare schemes but in fact well-thought and methodically
developed policies. Moreover, to promote and ensure the occurrence of CSR
practices governments have imposed purposely designed policies.
However, in the case of Pakistan there seems to be gap in the policies levied by the
government as well as in the goal orientation of the private sector. This study
aims to understand the existing dynamics of CSR in Pakistan as well as the barriers
to its implementation. The focus is primarily on the sugar sector; one of the most
significant segments of the economy.
This sector is important on many levels; sugar is an important cash crop
contributing much to the treasury of the country, the production process involves
small farmers, medium farmers as well as huge corporate firms and being a
staple good it is demanded and consumed by the entire population.
Applying the value-chain analysis the situation persisting in the sugar division
regarding corporate governance was researched and scrutinized carefully. The
evaluation took into consideration all aspects and produced this report with
respect to the views of all stakeholders. It was found that the farming community
was suffering largely due to exploitative practices by some sugar mills. These
exploitative actions included: low and fixed rates for the crop, illegal deductions,
restriction to the market and unjust buying terms and conditions. The situation
worsens leading to violence.

It was found the conceptualization of CSR requires major changes not only in the
policies and strategies of the government and companies but also major renovation
was required in the mindsets of the policymakers, managers of the private sector
as well as the consumers of the product. Activism lacks not only in the private
sector but on all levels. The consumers, policymakers and the managers need to
be educated on the term CSR and its derivations as well as its divisions;
furthermore its application in the sugar arena of Pakistan needs to be discussed
through open debates.
The civil society should form associations and platforms where important but
weak stakeholders such as the farmers can voice their opinions and complaints.
The government should also take the idea more seriously as it will help not only
the nation socially but also economically. It was recommended that policies should
be designed and enacted to ensure that social responsibility is not just a charitable
act but is legally supported and secured by the government.
Economic Survey of Pakistan 2008-09
One-man Commission Report, Competition Commission of Pakistan. 2009 (REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED
PETITIONS, TO DETERMINE THE COST OF PRODUCTION AND PROFIT MARGINS IN THE SUGAR SECTOR)
Sugar Industry in Pakistan (M. Aslam Memon, 2002)
Introduction
The purpose of this study is to understand the status of CSR practices in the
sugar industry of Pakistan with the use of the value chain analysis. The sample
was selected because sugar industry is an agro based industry and forms major
part of economy. This industry’s area of work is also spread across villages and to
the cities where its consumers live.
Pakistan’s economy is largely an agriculture based economy. Agriculture provides
livelihood to almost 44.7 percent of the total employed labor force in the country
and the present contribution to GDP stands at 21.8 percent.1 In Pakistan major
crops such as wheat, rice, cotton and sugarcane account for 82% of the value
added in the major crops. These major crops on average contribute 33.1% to the
value added in overall agriculture and 7.1% to GDP2 in which sugarcane by itself
contributes 3.4 percent and 0.7 percent, respectively.3 Being the second largest
industry in Pakistan with 82 mills the sugar industry is an important segment of
the corporate arena of the country. The sugar industry employs over 75000 people;
it approximately holds, directly and indirectly, 1.5 million of the total employment
of the country. Along with other levies to the Government, the industry
supplements around Rs. 4 million under the head of excise duty.4 Table 1 and 2
below represent the area under the important crops of Pakistan and their
production figures.

Table 1: Area under Important Crops5
Table 2 Production of important crops6

Agriculture in our country has a deep impact on socio-economic setup. The sugar
sector covers all social segments the linkages beginning from the grower of raw
materials passing from the downstream industry it lands on the table of a layman
Table 2: Production of Important Crops6

Gain Report – Sugar Annual 2010

All about Sugarcane (Nadeem Abbas Raja, Pakissan.com)
10 One-man Commission Report, Competition Commission of Pakistan. 2009 (REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED
as well as on an elite’s. The sugar production process creates a large market for
industrial products such as fertilizer, pesticides, tractors and agricultural
implements. Sugar is mainly produced from sugarcane; sugarcane may also be
treated to be used as alcohol, ethanol and chipboard.7 Sugarcane leaves may be
used as substrate for the artificial cultivation of edible mushrooms.
Table 3: Crop wise Composition of Value of Major Agriculture Crops8
Sugarcane is an important cash crop. Pakistan is the 5th largest country in the
world in terms of area under sugarcane cultivation but sadly it is 15th in terms of
production and yet worse Pakistan lies on the 60th rank in terms of yield. Sugarcane
is used for the production white sugar, ‘gur’, ‘shakkar’ and khandsari sugar. The
mills of Pakistan hold the capacity to produce 6.1 million tons annually operating
at the average 150 days.9 Sugar cane is a vital input for not only the sugar industry
but also the chipboard, and paper industries. In 2008-09, sugarcane was produced
on 1029 thousand hectares which calculates 17.1 percent lower than the year
before. Sugar mills are distributed in broadly three provinces of the country: 44
in the province of Punjab, 32 in Sindh, and 6 in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK).10

I. CSR
According to core economics every business works for maximization of profit.
But it is also noted that every person, business and entity is responsible for its
impact on the people linked to it both directly and indirectly and the space it
evolves in. The social network of a corporation is not limited to but may include
company’s stakeholders, employees, and customers, investors, suppliers,
business partner, government and community. A business holds both tangible
profits and intangible assets; the intangible holdings include its reputation,
goodwill, responsibility etc. A corporation is judged on both the tangible and the
intangible. CSR practices focus upon the businesses to work towards public
interest by development and growth of the community.
The concept of CSR is still not fully contextualized in Pakistan however on some
levels work has begun at least. A number of multinational companies are seen to
be bringing in CSR practices along with other innovative technologies from the
developed countries into the developing countries. In Pakistan the concept being
comparatively fresh is not understood correctly; the approach is mystified with
philanthropy.
It is clear that adoption of CSR strategies requires changes on all grounds of the
organization; from the mechanical procedures to the culture and values. Even in
fields where there is awareness of the CSR concept the companies choose to insert
simple philanthropy instead of producing intricate CSR models and strategies. It
must also be taken into account that in Pakistan there persist no laws or
Concept of Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR)

obligations ensuring corporate responsibility or sustainability hence the CSR
adopted is purely voluntary by the businesses.
The CSR umbrella holds issues in mainly four categories: environment, social,
economic and corporate governance. CSR can be imposed on a voluntary basis
by the individual company for its quality requirements, for shareholder
satisfaction or for consumer contentment. In some cases importing or exporting
countries have codes and standards related to corporate responsibility in others
NGOs are the driving force behind CSR discussions and awareness strategies.
Also some industries have codes of conduct for instance the EUREPGAP, moreover
global standards and codes have been developed to ensure CSR practices are
being implemented; these include the ISO 14000, SA 8000 or the Global Reporting
Initiative guidelines for sustainability.
Corporate Governance may be explained as the framework of rules and practices
by which a company ensures accountability, fairness and transparency in a
company’s relationship with all its stakeholders. Some managers affirmed that
“we have corporate governance model and all aspects of this model are properly defined according
to the rules and regulation of the industry”, however, the definition of corporate
governance was found distorted in the investigations for this study.
II. CSR in the Region
A manager of a well-know sugar mill criticized boldly that “while the discourse on
CSR receives heated panels in most countries Pakistan’s corporate sector is far from contributing
to the debate”.
CSR is a new specie in the corporate world all over. The concept and its
implementation are still in an evolutionary phase. Businesses and corporations
are turning to CSR not just out of ethical and social goodness but they are
attempting to achieve sustained growth of their operations by pleasing the hearts
of the consumers. CSR has become an important part of the business strategy.
With rising global competition, it seems vital for businesses to identify unique
and different ways of ensuring sustaining long term growth. Hence, companies
today strive to long beyond short term profits in order to assure long term
sustainable growth.
It must be understood that CSR not only benefits the society at large but in fact
directly provides gains to the companies as well. Many developed nations are

benefiting from the injections of CSR strategies into their corporate arena. These
strategies may include community care, development programs, supporting and
funding education and/or research, investigative journalism and environmental
protection actions.
CSR initiatives also advantaged the developed world by bringing communities
together. The concept of collective development has been encouraged and used in
many CSR programs to strengthen people’s commitment to development of their
country. Some leading businesses of developed nations have established
development foundations which work to alleviate and eradicate poverty in the
developing regions of the world.
Even though it is evident that CSR practices cannot be enforced but governments
are working to facilitate the debate and encourage and support initiatives willing
to participate in community development programs.
CSR in South Asia majorly related to ethical and philanthropic CSR instead of
strategic CSR. Strategic CSR centered on brand-associated corporate philanthropy
has progressed more rapidly. In South Asia the most common barrier to entrance
of CSR practices appears to be the mindset of corporations. A narrow-minded
vision targeting short-term profits only seems to be engraved in the region, this
may be owe to the lack of awareness and knowledge accompanied by suppressed
advice. The businesses in the area believe that CSR is a burden; even large
corporations seem to fear discussion on the subject. It is not only seen as a financial
burden as many businesses prefer to donate and engage in philanthropic work
but hesitate to research and plan a CSR program for social or/and community
development.
Hence, the progress on adoption of responsible corporate policies is slow,
unorganized and largely interrupted. The CSR principles accepted hold more
philanthropic characteristics. Businesses are presently participating in projects
to support education, healthcare facilities, sanitation and development of rural
areas. Still no or minimal initiatives are taken to educate and train communities,
to research and begin projects aimed at creating awareness and changing
mindsets, behaviors and attitudes of the population.
There needs to be a clear distinction between corporate responsibility and
corporate philanthropy, and this distinction needs to be communicated in the

region. Companies do not believe that CSR introduction in their products will
lead to higher returns eventually through better business, new customers and
entry into new markets.
There are many vital links and components completely missing in the discourse
of CSR in South Asia. Understanding CSR as integral part of successful business,
uniform definition of CSR, distinction between corporate philanthropy and CSR,
focus on ethical CSR practices, making standardized CSR principles available in
regional languages to put CSR in local context, comprehensive environment
protection policies and focus on long-term sustenance and success of business
are some of them.
Table 4: Yield per Hectare of Major Agriculture Crops11
11 Economic Survey 2009-10

I. Assumptions
This study is based on the simple assumptions that the participants were honest
while answering the questions and none of the questions were biased. Also the
analysis assumes that the sample was a fair representation of the population
targeted.
II. Value-chain Analysis
For the purpose of this study CSR will be looked upon in terms of corporate
governance issues. This research paper attempts to understand the value-chain
of the sugar industry, identify its stakeholders and then verify the relationships
between them. Below is a flowchart describing all steps of the progress.
Methodology

Literature Review
Identifying and
prioritizing value-chain
Preliminary mapping of the chain
Identifying and
prioritizing stakeholders
Designing research instruments
and indicators: Drafting and
scheduling interviews with
stakeholders
Field visits: Conducting
interviews of stakeholders
Data entering and cleaning
Data Analysis
CSR dimensions:
environment,
social, economic
and corporate
governance
Structural analysis
Governance and
Linkages
Paths between
sellers and buyers
Environmental
analysis
Resource
productivity and
environmental
performance
Developmental
analysis
Employment
and livelihoods
Integrating all material
Preparing Report :
CSR STUDY

It is necessary to understand which stakeholders are most influential in the value
chain as these stakeholders can be agents of change or agents blocking the change.
Stakeholders are all those people who are in one way or more affected by the
decisions and operations of the company. Internal stakeholders are those people
who are directly impacted for example suppliers, buyers, importers, exporters,
producers, employees, producer associations, while external stakeholders may
include the policy makers, worker organizations, NGOs and the media.
Below Figure1 dictates the sugar industry’s value-chain.
Figure 1: Value Chain Linkages in the Sugar Industry
Through thorough research it was identified that the milling stage plays a
dominant role in the chain. When studied further literature supported that the
relationship between the millers and growers was sour and weak. To further
investigate the matter, in-depth interviews were conducted to verify the on-
ground situation. The analysis took into account the views and experiences of
sugar mill managers, farmers, the Competition Commission of Pakistan, Pakistan
Sugar Mills Association and the consumers. Questionnaires used for the in-depth
interviews are attached in Annexes for view.
Growing
Harvesting
Transport
Wholesaler
Transport
Milling
Retailer
End-user

An Overview
I. Production Process
After ripening of the sugarcane crop in October-November, the crushing of
sugarcane continues till March and April. This period is termed as the crushing
season. It can stretch up to a maximum of 150 days.
Sugar is a major carbohydrate and derived largely from sugarcane and to a
smaller extent from sugar beet. There are three main simple sugars sucrose,
fructose and glucose. The natural sugar stored in the cane stalk or beet root is
separated from rest of the plant material through a process known as refining.
The sugarcane crop occupies the land for at least two years, blocking the land to
all other crops.
The sugar manufacturing process involves the following steps:

Pressing of sugarcane to extract the juice.

Boiling the juice until it begins to thicken and sugar begins to crystallize.

Spinning the crystals in a centrifuge to remove the syrup, producing
raw sugar.

The raw sugar is then washed and filtered to remove remaining non-
sugar ingredients and color.

Crystallizing, drying and packaging the refined sugar12
12 One-man Commission Report, Competition Commission of Pakistan. 2009 (REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED
Figure 2: Pictures taken of Raw Sugar at Khazana Sugar Mill, Peshawar
With the help of a survey it was found that irrigation requirements for sugarcane
vary depending on the crop usually it is essential to water the crop 40 to 50 times
a year. The amount of sugar produced in 2007-08 was 4,740,913 tons while in
2008-09, 3,205,993 tons were produced. The domestic consumption requirement
of sugar in Pakistan is estimated to be around 300,000 tons per month. As the
supply is falling the demand is at the rising end, especially during the month of
Ramadan the demand for sugar steepens.13
Table 5: Pakistan Sugarcane Area and Yield
Year
Area
Produced
Yield per
Utilization %
(000 ha)
(000 Tones)
Hectre
By Sugar Mills
2000-01
960.00
43,620
45.4
67.47
2001-02
999.7
48.041
48.1
76.33
2002-03
1,099.7
52,049
47.3
80.28
2003-04
1,074.8
53,800
50.1
81.15
2004-05
966.4
43,533
45.0
73.74
2005-06
907.0
44,292
48.8
67.94
2007-08
1241.300
63,920
51.50
75.55
There has been a reduction in the production of sugar mainly because growers
are revolting away from sugarcane due to the policies instated by sugar
processors. These strategies include delaying the crushing season, buying can at
13 One-man Commission Report, Competition Commission of Pakistan. 2009 (REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED

less than support price and holding payments. The farmers are growing
unapproved varieties which hold low sucrose content leading to low sugar
production and recovery rates.14
Diminishing sugarcane acreage witnessed, may also be due to: more area under
wheat crop restricting the sugarcane acreage, shortage of canal water due to
weakened water resources, load shedding of electricity, realization of lower prices
in the preceding season and higher rate of raw materials.15 The Gain Report adds
that decrease in sugarcane production is due to non transparent policies and
increase in minimum support price for competing crops. 16
Sugar Report by the CCP in addition provides that shortage of sugar and its
higher price is not related to low levels of production but in fact the untimely and
inadequate quantity of sugar reserves through imports and carried forward stocks
seem to be the real cause of shortages. However another significant factor of the
sugar crisis is the lack of well organized distribution system. Shortage of sugar is
a result of absence of a strategic food management system, role of sugar mills,
traders and wholesalers is also not favoring the sugar industry. 
According to Agriculture Census 2000, 73 percent of total area under sugarcane
was in medium sized farms of five to 50 acre. There are over 368 thousand farms
with average size of 11.6 acres from which on the average 2.4 acres is dedicated to
sugarcane. This means though under medium sized farmers, sugarcane cultivation
is mostly done on small patches hence the growers’ status as market entities
remains that of small producers. 198 thousand small farmers also produce
sugarcane on farms of less than five acres in size.17Through the survey conducted
it was found that the sugarcane production is dominated by small-sized farmers
and some middle-sized farmers. Mostly farmers growing sugarcane are small
farmers with land holdings lying between 5 to 50 acres; with sugarcane cultivated
on 5-10 acres. Farmers marked that with the passage of time situation for the
farmers and the poor is getting worse. The farmers complained that even if there
is a bumper stock, they are unable to benefit from it.
14 Gain Report – Sugar Annual 2010
15 Economic Survey of Pakistan 2009-10
16 USDA, Foreign Agricultural Service, GAIN Report “Pakistan Sugar Annual 2010”, May 2010.
17 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008

II. National Sugar Policy 2009-2010
The desperate need for a sugar policy was realized by the Government of Pakistan
and hence the National Sugar Policy 2009-10 came into being. The main aim of
this policy is to assure supply of sugar at competitive price to consumers
simultaneously providing a fair deal to the producers and growers.
It is also recognized in the National Sugar Policy that immediate action is required
to introduce and educate the growers about new and innovative techniques to
conserve water and enhance productivity per acre such as the precision sprinkle
agriculture. The policy further emphasizes that the introduction of alternative
crops should also be focused for instance the use of sugar beet to produce sugar.
Still, no awareness sessions or training workshops have been established yet.
Raw sugar is generally around $ 60-100/ton, cheaper than white sugar
and creates seasonal employment in the economy as well. The rationale
to import ‘raw sugar’ during the crushing season is that its processing is
viable costing Rs. 4.50 to Rs. 5.00/Kg while after the crushing season
it costs around Rs. 8 /Kg.
In consensus with the CCP findings mentioned above, due to weak policy
framework sugar has been imported and exported during the same year. The
timing and quantity of exports and imports have not remained consistent either
with domestic requirements or international market price variations this reflects
serious defects in the policy designed for the sugar industry. These internal
inefficiencies make Pakistan a net importer of sugar and the forecast of sugar
growth, in the country, looks bleak with the forecast predicting import of sugar
for another decade as consumption is rapidly increasing.18 The Sugar Advisory
Board, established through the National Sugar Policy by the Government of
Pakistan, also advocates the import of raw sugar to meet shortages. In the National
Sugar Policy an explanation has been provided as to why raw sugar is imported
instead of refined sugar and why is it imported during the crushing season. 19
18 Competition Assessment Study on the Sugar Sector in Pakistan, Competition Commission of Pakistan.
19 National Sugar Policy, Government of Pakistan. 2009-10

III. Competition Commission of Pakistan (CCP)
A report by the Competition Commission of Pakistan (CCP) emphasizes how the
organization of the sugar industry in Pakistan serves as a stark example depicting
the extent to which markets and public policy are routinely captured by inter-
connected interests. One of the main inefficiency of sugar production in Pakistan
is the delay in payment to farmers which leads to less cultivation of sugarcane. It
further predicts that the sugar industry in the long run may be characterized as
driven not by competition but by economic rent-seeking. The report explains
that a number of factors such as sugar recovery, molasses recovery, length of
crushing season and size of the mill crushing capacity play an important part in
determining the performance of the mill.
The besides CCP the Sugar Report also produced an enquiry report after intense
investigations stating that PSMA appears to be acting in violation of Section 4(1)
of the Ordinance. PSMA seemed to be leading a cartel in the sugar industry. From
the evidence it was gathered that under the face of PSMA sugar mills were working
in a “closed and protected” market instead of competing fairly. This arrangement
seemed to be managed “collusively and collectively” by PSMA.20
PSMA emerged to be operating a buyer’s cartel. According to the communication
records between sugar mills and between PSMA and various government
departments the mills had colluded to ensure a collective sugarcane pricing and
purchasing policy. These decisions were communicated, coordinated and
implemented by PSMA.
The millers had agreed to buy sugarcane within a particular territory; within
15km radius of the mill no one apart from that specific mill was to buy the
sugarcane from the farmer. Moreover, for instance, in Punjab the PSMA Punjab
zone would set a base price for sugarcane then the regional committee would
determine the maximum price for different varieties of sugarcane plus the rate of
deductions to be levied on ‘unapproved’ varieties. The seriousness of the
commitment was obvious as any member of PSMA this trend was to be
adjudicated by PSMA.
20 COMPETITION COMMISSION OF PAKISTAN ENQUIRY REPORT ON COLLUSIVE PRACTICES IN THE SUGAR
INDUSTRY, Shaista Bano Gilani; Syed Umair Javed, 21st October 2009

PSMA was also found operating a seller’s cartel according to CCP’s report; it was
involved in fixing sugar prices, proposing and allocating quotas and engaging in
collective negotiations for price. It was also evident that PSMA manipulates the
actions of TCP for the benefit of sugar mills. It seemed to have proposed to the
government to increase reserves of sugar and export supply in the market and to
import raw sugar only so that the mills could access a substitute to sugarcane
grown locally.
Consequences of enquiry report: some of the mills took stay orders from the court.
The order is still in the court till the matter is finalized. Supreme Court follows up
high court to handle this matter along with other notices like stay order etc.
It was further noted that the government was being played by PSMA’s effective
regulatory capture mechanism. PSMA appeared to further restrict competition
by controlling the number of mills in the market through creating barriers to
entry with use of the government to its advantage.
Later a one-man commission was established by the orders of the Supreme Court
of Pakistan to determine the cost of production and profit margins in the sugar
industry. That report criticizes that although the Federal Ministry of Industries
and Production (M&IP) claims to have a ‘dedicated wing’ for the compilation and
scrutiny of statistics relating to the sugar sector and the provincial governments
has sufficient resources to provide independent, credible and verifiable data-
analysis regarding cost of production no such exercise is being carried out
regarding the sugar sector. The information operated by M&IP is supplied by
PSMA in fact. M&IP has not verified the authenticity of the data. What is more, it
appears that even data used by Federal Board of Revenue is supplied by PSMA.
Since the date is not independently verified the veracity of calculations and
discrepancy remains dubious.
The price of sugar fluctuates more than frequently in Pakistan. International and
domestic factors reason the instability. For instance the flooding in Brazil and the
lack of rains in India adversely affected the global acreage used for producing
sugarcane. Hence, India became a net importer of sugar after being one of the
biggest exporters for years. These factors contributed to a rise in price of sugar in
Pakistan and everywhere else as well; in Pakistan, the price of sugar in March
2009 was Rs. 43.83 per kg and by August 2009 it had jumped to Rs. 51.86 per kg.

The CCP report states that the price of sugar amid few other commodities
continued to rise in 2009, basically due to the 11% reduction in global output.
The report explains that the sugar crisis was self-created by the players of the
industry. Dealers had paid the sugar mills but did not lift them from the mills
waiting for Ramadan so that prices would increase due to increased demand.
These dealers wanted to create artificial demand-supply distortions to benefit
their profit margins.
Punjab government’s attack increased the harm by affected the supply-chain.
USC transportations were stopped from carrying sugar across provincial lines
further creating a shortage. It is the considered view of the Commission that the
hike in sugar prices was not the real crisis that the media appears to have made
it out to be. Rather, the nature of the crisis, as per the considered view of the
Commission, is really the non availability of the commodity to the consumer.
CCP’s officer spoke on matters of CSR. She explained that in Pakistan CSR is not
implemented so seriously, yet multinational organizations are contributing and
trying to put their maximum effort for implementing CSR. Also some local
organizations have contributed in the sense that they comply with their
requirements. The officer focused that there is no innovation and awareness
regarding the concepts of CSR.
IV. Pakistan Sugar Mills Association (PSMA)
A representative platform of the sugar mills of Pakistan, the Pakistan Sugar Mill
Association (PSMA), was established with its objectives set out in the
Memorandum of Association. PSMA plays a critical role in the manufacture of
sugar, protecting the interest of the sugar mills and its linkage with sugar allied
industries. By law PSMA meets at least once a year. A PSMA official assured that
representative of all farmers’ associations participate in the meetings of PSMA,
namely Punjab Agriculture, Kisan Association. As put on the website of PSMA its
objectives include: to create an institutional structure for the research and
development for sugar industry.21
21 http://www.psmacentre.com/

According to the minutes of the Annual Meeting of PSMA the economic disaster of
2007-08 involving the sugar industry was due to lack of government policies.
Moreover the report accuses that Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MINFAL)
prefers the shortfall in sugar production to ensure hefty return to big landlords
of sugarcane at the cost of consumers. It also blames the Government for instating
defective policy of fixing agriculture produce support price.22
Sugar and Gur Price mainly depend on global sugar deficit, import price of raw
sugar and sugarcane price (80% of cost price). To emphasize the report adds that
the price of sugar is totally dependent on the quantum of sugarcane.23
V. Farmers and Mills
It was found that very few farmers are loyal to specific mills; most farmers opt to
sell to their stock to the mill which offers them easy passageway, prompt payment
or better rate. The farmers’ held battered and bruised feelings towards the mills.
The main issue between the two being the payment process; it was declared that
usually there is a delay of a month at least. Also the topic of deductions was
fragile; many arguments took birth at this stage. The disagreement between
farmers and millers on the rate of deduction have become so severe at times that
acts of violence have been recorded resulting in many a times physical injuries
and even deaths.
The National Sugar Policy acknowledges that to settle the disputes between the
sugarcane growers and the sugar industry the Sugar Advisory Board has been
set up by the Government of Pakistan. In spite of this during the field research
conducted for this study no farmer seemed to be familiar with this institutional
platform.
The poor mills-farmers relationship makes it intricate to procure cane in the
required quantity during the crushing season. Furthermore, the long duration of
the crushing season is also economically unfeasible for the sector though it might
be feasible for the mills in terms of financial return. The Sugar Report asserts that
de-zoning and emergence of middle men has further increased the gap between
farmers and mills escalated cost of sugar.24
22 44th Annual General Meeting Report, PSMA (March 2010)
23 44th Annual General Meeting Report, PSMA (March 2010)
24 Competition Assessment Study on the Sugar Sector in Pakistan, Competition Commission of Pakistan.

VI. Farmers and Government
The farmer community voiced that the Government is responsible for their
heartaches; the Government is not protecting them from exploitative and unjust
policies and actions of the sugar mills. There is no concept of crop insurance, in
fact the term has not been heard of in the farming community. Many suggestions
and complaints were received from the growers of sugarcane including that the
government needs to hear their concerns, protect them from mistreatment, provide
them fair and efficient solutions, empower them and educate them.
VII. Consumers
Consumers do realize that sugar is a necessity being an edible item. It is a staple
food used in everyday life; in beverages, snacks or desserts. The end-users as such
are unaware of the manufacturing process of sugar, but they are alert that sugar
is basically produced from sugarcane or sugar beet. The consumers of refined
sugar were not educated on the topics of whether the process of sugar production
is fair or not; the consumers did not recall any initiative undertaken by the sugar
industry as philanthropic in fact. The local public was not familiar to the term of
CSR hence the respondents were not able to judge whether the sugar industry is
CSR compliant or not. None of the respondents, both young and old, were
interested in ensuring CSR practice in Pakistan. Only 1% of the respondents
participated in the Sugar Boycott 5-12 November 2009, still all participants of
the survey remembered the year 2007-08 as significant for sugar. They explained
that an artificial shortage was created by sugar mills to increase the market
prices resulting in the worst form of cartelization. Realizing the dynamics of the
corporate world the consumers understand that the industrialists only work to
increase their own profits. The end-users questioned also added that most of the
industrial owners were political entities. All respondents do imply that sugar
mills like all other participants of the society do have social responsibilities namely
environmental, labor rights and sustainability of natural resources.

The Sugar Sector
I. CSR Awareness
The managers were largely aloof from the concept of CSR. They linked it with
philanthropy or solely with worker rights according to the labor law. For instance,
they were conscious of laws regarding child labor and working hours. The
managers stated that since sugar manufacturing was a safe procedure no
environmental care was required although full utilization of sugarcane was
stressed.
Ex-chairman of PSMA on the other hand asserted that in regard of corporate
governance all sugar mills of Pakistan are ensuring complete responsibility, clarity
and justice towards all stakeholders, specifically the growers and the employees.
“All mills have their own schools, dispensaries and fair price outlets for workers and farmers.
We keep eyes on the farming community and facilitate them if any obstacle is present. We
promote them to develop new seeds varieties to increase productivity. There are only 2 or 3 out
of 80 mills that have issues with their providers but most mills maintain good civil relationships
and try to provide all social benefits to people engaged with them.” The officer further
accused that it is the media trying to flaunt minor issues generalizing them to the
entire industry. PSMA as the rest of the industry also seemed to lack lucidity on
the basic concept of CSR; it too attached CSR to philanthropy solely.
It was also concluded that practices regarding social welfare were in the hands of
the owner if he/she wishes to introduce some charitable scheme the managers
will implement it happily. The managers asserted that sugar industry belongs to
the private sector with profit maximization as the main objective; the managers
are basically following orders from owners who appear to be interested in profit

only. Some managers assuming CSR as purely philanthropy declared that they
were “technical” and “financial” persons hence had no knowledge of such
mechanisms.
Moreover, it was added that the market for sugar is not stable with sugar prices
fluctuating, highest priority in such circumstances it to ensure profit and once
that is assured mills can ponder on issues of CSR.
Still managers as well as PSMA officials presented a consensus that there is a
strong need for CSR practices to be introduced in Pakistan for the overall
betterment of the nation. None of the sugar mills in Pakistan seem to have a
developed CSR model in place.
II. Laws Regarding CSR
Managers affirmed that the government is not taking any interest in terms like
sustainability or responsibility; the debate on CSR has not even begun in Pakistan
let alone the implementation of the practice. It was also added that the gap
between the international markets and Pakistan will be worsened if the corporate
world of Pakistan remains aloof. There are no laws or government obligations in
the knowledge of the mill managers that could be implemented on the sugar
industry. Some respondents, however, stated that many laws exist in Pakistan
and that good well-structured but the problem remains that these laws are merely
to remain in books and are not implemented. The government is not ensuring
CSR practice in any form in Pakistan on any level.
PSMA recorded that ISO 14000 standard is implemented in the sugar industry as
it’s a legal requirement for exportation purpose.
A few years back, sugar was packed in colored bags in Pakistan; these bags
contained recycled material which was harmful for human health. PSMA took a
stand and got a legislation passed from the Government ensuring that sugar
bags in the country will be transparent and safe.
Most managers insisted on the direct impacts of the mills on farmers and
employees solely. The society at large was not given any attention. The mills
seemed to own a restricted stance towards their impact when asked if they are
taking any initiative to improve the quality of life a manager replied again focusing
on employees only. “We are trying to introduce some benefits to our workers including

health insurance, car loans, housing schemes. In the history of the industry this is the first time
that such benefits are offered to employees.” Sadly, no respondent belonging to the
farmer community was conscious of any institution, whether government, non-
government or community-based, working to improve the quality of life.
III. Barriers and Implementation
Mill runners found that the major barriers blocking the path of CSR into Pakistan
evolve around the grave issues of political instability. Moreover, the industrialists
do not know about CSR or its components hence there is the tall obstacle of
narrow mindsets. PSMA added that there are no barriers on part of the private
sector all that is required for effective implementation of CSR in Pakistan is the
Government’s support. It was added that the FBR should provide major reforms
in the industrial policies and the Government should ensure consistent policies
not only for the present but also for the future.
For successful implementation it is essential to create awareness and educate the
audience about the basic advantages of CSR. When rules or laws are levied on the
people as a natural reaction they begin to find escape routes the PSMA official
insisted: “In my opinion when we will create awareness then the people will automatically
motivate toward these things. A collective effort is required for such transitions.”
IV. Reporting and Auditing
PSMA claimed that every company has a monthly report with an audit balance
sheet. These reports are available on stock exchange and a copy of monthly
report is sent to each share holder as well. Managers reported that there is no
published self imposing social responsibility code of conduct adopted by mills.
None of the mills seem to have conducted a social audit ever, in fact that showed
no interest in any other audit but the financial. No mill has a handbook for ethical
behavior but its observation is “understood” by all employees of the mills. Mill
managers did not mention any specific disclosure and reporting strategy but
vaguely described the openness of the sector. Reporting is mainly the role of the
head office; they publish annual reports which are shared in PSMA meetings.
V. Year 2007-08
Generally, managers seem to rate the year 2007-08 as “good” for the sugar
industry. Whoever, when questioned about the bumper stock of sugarcane during

2007-08 they claimed not to remember it significantly. PSMA on the other hand
claimed that the year was not beneficial for the sugar mills mainly due to lagging
Government policies. A report confirmed that: “In 2007-08 season when sugar mills
offered the farmers untenable rates they had no option but to set on fire their standing crops”.25
Only one manager confessed that there was a bumper stock in 2007-08 as
compared to previous years and some farmers burnt their stock because factories
offered unreasonable ripping rates for the stock, “but this was mainly in Dera Ismail
Khan area that too because a 60% deduction was levied on the crop”. PSMA on the other
hand claimed that there was no burning of ripe stock it was basically a political
drama set up to indict sugar mills. An officer of the CCP explained that the 2007-
2008 sugar crisis was due to the availability of sugar, sugar was produced but
not available for the consumer. She also further asserted that the Government
had made late decisions regarding the import hence aggravating the crisis as
limited access to sugar opened doors to exploitation. The Punjab Government
ceased factories to extract the holding stock of sugar but the authority had no
channel for distribution of sugar other than Utility Stores but these stores follow
a complicated time-consuming process through which it buys sugar for this
reason, the population remained starved for sugar.
VI. Pricing and Quality
In a report by the CCP, it is explained how the Governments, both at the Federal
and Provincial level, are key players in the balance of the sugar industry and its
market. The provincial governments fix a ‘support price’ for sugar; this price is
the bare minimum that should to be paid to the farmer per 40 kg of sugarcane.
This ‘support price’ is based on the ‘indicative price’ set by the Federal Government
this indicative price is not a definite number but a price range. This range according
to MINFA is based on a number of factors which the provincial government takes
into account while putting in the ‘support price’. For instance the cost of
production of sugarcane, average wholesale prices of sugar, prices received by
cane growers in the last year, import parity based on average FOB London price
of white sugar, export parity based on average FOB London price of white sugar
and an average of all the figures taken into consideration. The ‘support price’
usually includes the: seed-bed preparation, land cultivation, labor costs, cost of
25 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008t

diesel, machinery employed, depreciation of machinery, irrigation related costs,
land rent.26
The indicative price is submitted with considerations such as the aim of protecting
growers’ interests as well as to not discourage cultivation of other crops by keeping
a very high indicative price. To reach an efficient concluding price range or price
it is important that the study conducted by branches of the Government is done
in an “independent and credible manner” otherwise the ‘support price’ will fail
to accord protection to the grower’s interest. It was admitted by the Government
of Punjab during the investigations by CCP that no specialized exercise was done
to arrive at the ‘support price’ the same situation persisted in other provinces.27
The data is usually provided by PSMA and there is no definite or credible basis
for verifying the genuineness of cost-related data presented.
Legally the sugarcane procurement rate is fixed to show a minimum price but
managers believe that if they offer a higher rate to farmers it will be “illegal”. All
managers readily asserted that they promoted fair competition. There was a
consensus on the practice of fixing procurement rate for sugarcane; they added
that the mechanism was fair and efficient for the market. Some managers did
suggest that price of sugarcane should be set keeping in mind prices of other
commodities more particularly a fair margin for millers should be considered. In
the National Sugar Policy document the Government agrees that sugar price
should be determined by the market forces since cost of production of sugar is
different for every mill.28 All farmers agreed that it is wise to set a procurement
rate for sugarcane; however it was pointed out that farmers have no say in fixation
of rates, some respondents added that there is a representative of farmer
community but the farmers have only heard of this entity. Moreover it was added
that rates should remain constant form beginning of the manufacturing year to
the end. The CCP officer repeatedly pressed that the there should be a free market
presiding the sugar industry and if not so then the rates should be decided
according to the cane content. Below is a table presenting the support prices for
agricultural crops.
26 One-man Commission Report, Competition Commission of Pakistan. 2009 (REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED
27 One-man Commission Report, Competition Commission of Pakistan. 2009 (REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED
28 National Sugar Policy, Government of Pakistan. 2009-10

Table 6: Procurement/Support Prices of Agriculture Commodities29
It was clearly specified in the National Sugar Policy that the price of sugarcane is
to be set according to sucrose content instead of weight. It was announced that
the “mechanism of pricing sugarcane on sucrose content shall be introduced in all the provinces.”
The prices were to be set on the basis of variety at first and later international
pricing methodologies will be introduced. Moreover, to implement this decision
a test case was to be established; two to three mills in each province would be
encouraged by the Government to adopt this pricing practice for the year 2009-
10. 30 According to the interviews conducted for this study in 2012 every manager
did agree that prices should be fixed in relation with quality of the crop yet no
such mechanism was in place in Pakistan at the moment. Mills in Sindh have
paid premium based on sucrose contents to all growers but this brings about the
problem of asymmetric information providing growers of inferior quality a free-
ride.31
29 Economic Survey 2009-10
30 National Sugar Policy, Government of Pakistan. 2009-10
31 Competition Assessment Study on the Sugar Sector in Pakistan, Competition Commission of Pakistan.

In all other countries the price of sugarcane is determined according to the sucrose
content in sugarcane; however, in Pakistan the price of sugarcane is affirmed
according to its weight. PSMA explained in the CCP investigation that in 2005 it
was decided in a meeting that price of sugarcane would be determined according
to sucrose content but the decision has not been implemented.32
The pricing according to weight of sugarcane treats crops of varying quality in
the same manner violating principles of a market economy that bring efficiency.
It must be noted that a crop with higher sucrose content contributes to efficiency;
it reduces the cost borne by sugar mills while recovering sugar and this reduction
in cost can be passed along the supply chain to the consumer as well. Furthermore
due to weight-based pricing growers are not encouraged to produce sugarcane of
better quality using improved production techniques.
When it came to the deduction placed on quality of sugarcane many contesting
replies were received. One view held that there is no such deduction in existence
but there should be one legally levied. Others believed that a 10-20% deduction
should be in effect in times of bumper stock even if such deduction was not covered
legally furthermore PSMA insisted that there are laws allowing deduction of
weight based on the quality of sugarcane. It must be noted that the percentage
rate of the deduction is entirely random and does not follow any scientific
determination. The third school of thought claimed “we are and always have been
against deduction on the basis of sugarcane quality. If a stock is of ‘unapproved’ variety we
simply refuse to buy it”. Again the judgment of whether a crop is of ‘unapproved’
variety is established on experience of the team and no scientific tool is engaged.
Farmers complained that the rate of deduction on the grounds of low quality of
sugarcane is fixed by the mill’s personal will they suggested the rate should be set
through a proper scientific mechanism by research laboratories. It was found
that the purchase staff of the factory determines the recovery rate of the cane that
is how much sugar can be extracted from a certain quantity of sugarcane this is
not done through the physical examination of sugarcane or any scientific
mechanism. A farmer report further implied that the quality assessment is not
documented since this deduction does not enjoy legal cover; the mill instead
proportionately lowers the weight of purchased cane in documents.33
32 One-man Commission Report, Competition Commission of Pakistan. 2009 (REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED
33 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008t

Both the growers and the farmers pay 50% Cess to the Government. This Cess
fund is used for the development of the area. Farmers and the mills are meant to
equally share this but usually farmers are made to pay it in full according to the
existing research.34
VII. Payment to Farmers
Very few managers actually accepted that the payment process to growers was
not efficient and/or fair. The Competition Commission reports that there is no
well thought-out and planned apparatus of ensuring payment to the cultivator.
The provincial governments fix the ‘support price’ but fail to provide a mechanism
ensuring payment to the farmer.
Figure 3: Huge Stocks of Sugar Bags at Mills waiting to be Dispatched at Higher Prices
Legally a farmer can move the Additional
Cane Commissioner or Provincial Cane
Commissioner can be moved against the
non-payment by a mill. However, no
mechanism exists for the implementation
of this verdict. If the factory does not
release the payment to the farmer after
one year of the order the commissioner
can send the case to civil judge or
magistrate after imposing an 11-time fine
on the outstanding amount against the factory. But the proceedings in the courts
of civil judge or magistrate come under civil suit, which also prolong the matter
for years.35
It was discovered that usually industries attempt to save the mark-up by delaying
the payment to growers. Every mill protecting its honor claimed that there was
no delay in payment in their mill. Once in a while if the delay does occur it is due
to bumper stock of sugarcane. There is a law stating that payment cannot be
delayed beyond 15 days but implementation of the law is questionable as farmers
claimed the delay lasts longer than many months at times. The payment to farmers
is released only after the sugar stock is sold. The mills assess the rate of sugar in
34 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008
35 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008

the market and only then sell the sugar otherwise they hold the stock till the
market rate rises. The managers are aware of the negative consequences that
may burden a farmer due to delayed payments leading to discouragement of
growers hence decreasing acreage of sugarcane but they argue that the mill is
helpless and cannot facilitate a faster payment mode. Some managers asserted
that the Government should execute a mechanism which will aid the mill gain
liquidity for the sugar stock in turn the mill will grant the growers punctual
payment. PSMA officer explained that the delay in payments occurs when there
is a huge stock of sugar sitting at the mills waiting to be sold. He suggested that
the Government needs to give permission to export so that payments will be
released to farmers moreover the Government should authorize banks so that
they should give loan to the farmer with lower rates of interest. There are only 5
or 6 mills that have payment problem they release payment to farmers after
selling their sugar which is only due to their rigid financial problems.
After weighing the grower is issued the cane procurement receipt (CPR), which
carries written detail of weight of sugarcane and the payable amount after
deduction of sugarcane Cess. There are thousands of farmers witnessed running
from pillar to post in government offices for help to receive their outstanding
amounts from mills. It was further noted that the delay in payment by the mills
makes news and officials and politicians issue statements but the core situation
remains always the same.36
VIII. Ensuring Supply of Sugarcane
There seemed to be a division in view regarding the “indent”; the indent is the
most sought-after piece of paper. Favors are sought from MNAs and MPAs and
bribes are offered to factory administration to get the indent.37 While some farmers
found the process fair others protested that they have to work hard procuring
the indent from the mill, when the mill realizes that the grower is desperate to get
an indent they misuse the situation to force the farmer to agree to their terms and
conditions (usually ripping the farmer’s gains). All managers found the practice
of giving out an indent very essential for efficient and smooth production of
sugar. Some further claimed that this practice is followed for maximum utilization
of sucrose content in the sugarcane. The moment the sugarcane crop is cut the
36 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008
37 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008

sucrose content within it begins to deteriorate so the mills give out indent to
organize the farmers bring in their stock; in this manner the sugarcane trolleys
don’t have to wait outside the mill gate for their turn to arrive. CCP supporting
the mechanism briefed: “corporation provides credit to the farmers so it may be efficient
because farmer have surety about his crop. If you have certainty and you have low risk then
that is the biggest thing because that is beneficial for both parties. But term and condition
should properly clear and these term and condition should not be exploitative.”
IX.Delaying the Crushing
The sugarcane crop ripens in October and November; the mills are legally bound
to start purchasing and crushing between 1st October to 30 November however
a report accused that the millers prefer a delayed start so that cane weight is
lessened due to drying and the sugar content is higher. The report continues to
write that the delay also makes the farmers anxiety as they need to clear the farm
for sowing of wheat or other crops. This panic helps the factories procure the
cane on their terms.38 On the other hand all managers reported that there is no
conscious delay in crushing this would adversely affect the quality of sugarcane
reducing the sucrose content and hence a delay would be disadvantageous for
the mill. However there may be a wait if there is a heavy stock of sugarcane in
such cases the hindrance is purely due to the limited capacity of the production
process.
X. Weighing the Crop
Even though, the National Sugar Policy promises that ‘kunda’ and sucrose variety
testing stations are to be monitored by provincial governments using the Sugar
Cess Fund to guarantee fair testing and weighing facilities no such practice is
being followed. The respondents reported that weighing, pricing and judging the
crop is strictly between the grower and the mill with no intervention from any
neutral third party. To protect themselves and minimize the occurrence of
exploitation growers usually weigh their stock on independent private weighing
stations before bringing it to the mill. The sugarcane is weighed by the factories
or factory-authorized weigh stations; farmers appealed that the weight of the
sugarcane cannot be challenged or verified by a neutral party; they at times do
raise their voices against this practice but are not heard. Most farmers are
38 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008

uneducated and hence don’t understand the technical calculations. Nearly all
managers granted that there is no neutral party which could challenge the weight
of sugarcane the matter is between the growers and the mill. Nonetheless, a
single manager did state that weights are verified by the District Coordination
Officer of every district is ex-officio Additional Cane Commissioner of the area
and local administration through inspections.
The CCP officer stated that the CCP is against government monitoring process
and intervention such micro levels. Instead the Government should empower
farmers so that they can solve their micro level problems independently. For
instance in Sindh farmers have their own chambers registered with the
Government. Such farmer organizations should be strengthened so that within
the community they can solve their problems without involving the authorities.
XI. The Crop: Seeds and Fugicides
Largely it was observed that crop failure occurred due to unfavorable weather;
mainly cold. But some respondents also asserted that diseases were responsible
for crop deaths and illnesses; common diseases include Red Rot, Leaf Spot and
virus. The Stem Canker (Cytospora sacchari) Butl. causes wilting of canes. The affected
canes show drying of leaves from top to bottom. The cane stems are dried-up
with significant fall in quantity and quality of sugarcane. Small black dot-like
bodies of disease causing fungus may develop on bud sheaths and hollow portions
of canes. The much feared Red Rot (Colletotrichum falcatum) Went. is indicated by
red bright gashes on the mid rib of leaves. It shows itself as drooping and changing
of color of upper leaves withering of the leaves follows. The Leaf Spot
(Helminthosporium spp.), may be characterized by small lesions on leaves, which
gradually enlarge along the mid rib and assure dark red to brown color. In severe
infection, the leaves become dry affecting photosynthesis. According to literature
the most destructive diseases are born from fungi bacteria, viruses and
nematodes. There are over 50 illnesses that may take over a sugarcane crop. All
parts of plant are open to disease and one or more diseases can occur on any plant
and in any region. 39
The other minor diseases of sugarcane reported from Pakistan are: sugarcane
mosaic virus, pokkah boeng, whip smut, chlorotic streak virus, ratoon stunting,
39 Diseases of Sugarcane, By Mithal Jiskani, Assistant Professor, Sindh Agriculture University, Tandojam, October 2001
yellow spot, red stripe, rust and genetic variegation of leaf and sheath.40The direct
cost of the crop failure is burdened on the farmers.
Table 7: Sugarcane Production and Recovery
Year
Cane Crushed (Tones)
Sugar Made (Tones)
Recovery
2000-01
29,408,879
2,466,788
8.39%
2001-02
36,708,638
3,197,745
8.71%
2002-03
41,786,689
3,652,745
8.74%
2003-04
43,661,378
3,997,010
9.15%
2004-05
32,101,739
2,922,126
9.10%
2005-06
30,090,632
2,588,176
8.59%
2006-07
26,583,603
-
8.53%
2007-08
52,757,140
-
8.98%
While some managers bragged that the mills provided seeds as well as necessary
fungicides to growers, growers told otherwise. The farmers explained that the
mill provides seeds and fungicides only if there is an agreement that the farmer
will only provide to that mill. Similarly mills boasted confidently that they
provided both training and advice to growers on better productivity of crop
through specialized field staff. The growers of the area were on the contrary alien
to the practice and reported “we have never met or even seen these trainers in our area”.
XII. Agents, Dealers and Contractors
There are dealers who offer the farmers a trouble free passage for their stock and
a prompt payment. These contractors buy the stock from the farmer near the
farm give the grower on the spot cash payment and take the stock to the factory
on their own transport. It is proved that most agents, who offer the farmers a
trouble free passage for their stock and a prompt payment, are private individuals
in no way linked to the mills. In fact mill managers stated that:“They are dangerous
for both parties (farmers and industries).They have no relations with farmers even with industries.
Government should discourage such people. They buy sugarcane in very low prices from the
farmer and sell in very high prices to the industries so they got profit without any effort”.
40 Diseases of Sugarcane, By Mithal Jiskani, Assistant Professor, Sindh Agriculture University, Tandojam, October 2001

It was noted that the mill also has agents operating for them. These agents are
usually set up in areas far from the mill since the growers of that area will never
travel to the mill themselves so in this way the mill ensures that it is receiving a
healthy supply of sugarcane. The independent contractors are perceived as
sympathetic and considerate beings working for the betterment of growers by
the farmers.
XIII. ‘Gur’
Due to scarce stock the ‘gur’ and ‘shakar’ are offered a higher price than white
sugar. Even though there is no limitation on the manufacture of ‘gur’ there is a
ban on the export of ‘gur’ restricting its market. All managers bluntly announced
that ‘gur’ making should not be permitted. Some the growers in the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa area are also traditional manufacturers of ‘gur’. They believe ‘gur’
making should remain permissible to help them support their financial situation.
Gur is very dangerous for the sugar industry according to mill managers. They
added Peshawar is a traditional gur making area, the government provides
protection to all those people who are involved in gur making and demanded
that this practice needs to be altered. Technically the sugar industry can get 96%
benefits from the sugarcane but gur maker can get 60 to 65% so there is 35% loss
of natural resources.
The mills disapproved ‘gur’ making to the extent that they considered the ruthless
Sugarcane Act as “fair”. This act banned gur making in many ‘reserved area’ and
prohibited farmers to sell their produce to any other buyer but the particular
mill. Unlike the mill managers, farmers found the Sugarcane Act of 1934 extremely
unfair and supported ‘gur’ making actively, in fact they pleaded that export of
‘gur’ should be permitted. The PSMA officer was in partial favor of the Act. It was
beneficial for the small growers as they received seeds and fertilizer from the
industries, industries worked for the benefit of the associated farmers. After de-
zoning the farmer could sell the crop to any mill so the mill stopped trying to
enhance their productivity. The reason given by the officer for slightly opposing
the act was that the farmer was restricted to one particular mill only.
XIV. Zoning and De-zoning
The reserved area laws were amended in 1980s when the new industrial aspirants
opposed these. Zoning was ceased due to the low capacity of sugar industry. This

zoning was “100% fair” according to managers; beneficial for both the farmers
and millers. With regard to zoning the farmers stood on a different foot than the
managers. They believed that if zones were developed again they will further be
dependent on a single mill and hence probability of their exploitation will increase.
This law provided sustained monopoly by the old industrial class according to a
farmer’s report. Traditional gur makers were seen as ‘villains’ of sugar sector.
Raids were done in villages and punishments were assigned to those found guilty
of making gur from their own or purchased sugarcane usually confiscating the
gur making machines. 41
XV. Accessibility
Managers of sugar mills claimed that the entire population of the country has
access to sugar. Access according to them depends on demand and supply,
presently sugar demand on the nation level accounts to be 4.2 million tons while
supply is estimated to be 5 million tons so access is assured.
They added that Trading Corporation of Pakistan (TCP) keeps stock of sugar to
cover gaps in demand and supply. It was also mentioned that the government
aids the process of accessibility by selling sugar at discounted prices. According
to the National Sugar Policy, the TCP must hold 0.5 million tons of white sugar at
all times. Taking into consideration the local demand and competitive price these
reserves may be maintained through imports or domestic procurement.42
TCP is the prime trading organization of Pakistan it was set up as a private
limited company in 1967. TCP is under the sole ownership and administrative
control of Ministry of Commerce, Government of Pakistan acting only under
directions from the Government of Pakistan.
When the Government of Pakistan expects shortage or surplus of a particular
commodity it can direct the TCP to import or export the certain commodity. TCP
floats international tenders in case of importing in accord with the Public
Procurement Authority Rules, 2004 (‘PEPRA Rules’). Once TCP has a winning bid
it the Ministry of Finance is educated regarding the amount of foreign exchange
necessary for the deal. The Ministry routes this information to the State Bank of
41 Farmer Report, Punjab Lok Sujag. October 2008
42 National Sugar Policy, Government of Pakistan. 2009-10

Pakistan which in turn works with six specified banks who establish Letters of
Credit to facilitate procurement/purchase by TCP. The CCP report informs that
TCP buys sugar from sugar mills through open tenders in terms of PEPRA Rules.
Interestingly, as per newspaper reports the sugar mills have an option to buy
back the commodity at a premium of 25%.43
All managers stated that even the poorest of the country had access to sugar with
USC playing a vital role. While the CCP added that sugar is a homogenous
commodity with low elasticity of demand so it is impossible for the government
to ensure that subsidies targeted through price-fixing actually reach the poorest
sections of the society. Surprisingly the solution to complete accessibility of sugar
to the entire population including the poor was to rely solely on open market
mechanisms.
The government has placed initiatives to protect the vulnerable these schemes
include the Benazir Income Support Programme (BISP) and the Utility Stores
Corporation (USC). Even though the National Sugar Policy states that to protect
the vulnerable groups in the population the Government has taken the initiative
of BISP through which the holder of the subscribed debit card shall be able to
purchase sugar at a subsidized rate from specific USC outlets or depot/fair price
shop/mobile stores set up with aid from provincial governments. In the policy it
is stated that the cost of the differential (relief of 10-20% in price from market
price) shall be shared equally between the Government and PSMA44, however, no
mill manager appeared to be aware of this arrangement. In fact respondents
asserted that the initiative was purely by the Government and the sugar mills
have no role in it. Managers explained that mills play no role in these initiatives;
PSMA official added that even though the initiative is purely governmental but
sugar industries provide free sugar to government for such schemes.
Moreover, the policy states that “For the eleventh month of the calendar year 2009 sugar
meant for household consumption shall be sold at the uniform price of Rs. 40 /kg in every nook
and corner of the country; the respective Provincial governments will designate kiryana/retail
shops/ any other arrangement in appropriate localities as, ‘sale point/ ration depots’.”45 Again
a scheme none of the respondents were sentient of.
43 One-man Commission Report, Competition Commission of Pakistan. 2009 (REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED
44 National Sugar Policy, Government of Pakistan. 2009-10
45 National Sugar Policy, Government of Pakistan. 2009-10

XVI. By-products
Figure 4: Industrial Alcohol Produced at Sugar Mills
Sugar production results in over 100 by-
products including alcohol, vinegar,
confectioneries, animal feed, poultry feed,
fish feed, paper, chipboard, win-board,
hard board and plywood. Tops are used
as fodder for livestock and trash as fuel.46
Molasses, a by-product of sugar, can be
used to manufacture industrial and fuel
grade ethanol. However, in Pakistan for
than often this by-product is used to feed
animals or is exported as a raw material since only nineteen sugar mills have
distilleries utilizing molasses for the production of ethanol.
Figure 5: By-product (Mud) Extraction at a Sugar Mill
Managers reported that there are four
types of products from sugarcane in the
sugar industry; sugar is our main product
other three are molasses, bagasse (which
used as fuel) and Mud (use as fertilizer).
40 to 45% of molasses is utilized for
making alcohol which is then exported
mainly, it was noted that some industries
do not make alcohol and export molasses.
Some mills in Pakistan produce nearly
2500 kilowatt electricity for their own use with the help of steam. Moreover, the
water is reused as well; the same water is rotated in the process. PSMA officers
boasted that all sugar mills produce their own electricity for its own purpose; he
added that the Government doesn’t give them permission to produce electricity
on a larger level, “we have presented in front of different departments proposing that we can
help in the energy shortage of the country by contributing electricity but no attention was
rewarded to the proposal”.
46 Pakkisan.com

XVII. Research and Development
To encourage research and study the Government has assigned the Province
Agriculture Research Institutes to study and verify, with cooperation from the
private sector, the best suited varieties of sugarcane in the area. To achieve high
yield and high recovery characteristics two dedicated projects were to be set up
by the Ministry of Food and Agriculture. It is important to note though that the
Ministry of Food and Agriculture has been devolved under the 18th Amendment,
where these projects have been diverted is a question yet to be investigated.47
The expertise of the grower as well as the resources available to the grower
determines the quality of the crop. The issue is that Pakistan does not have
institutions or bodies conducting research regarding improvements in
agricultural productivity. The existing research institutions in the public sector
are “starved” of funding.
47 National Sugar Policy, Government of Pakistan. 2009-10

A manager asserted that the acceptance of change is essential for adaption of
change. Implementation of CSR practices is impossible until and unless it is
mentally accepted by all stakeholders. The manager further recommended that
the Government can promote such acceptance through advocacy and awareness
sessions.
The CCP officer explained the desperate need to address the lack of awareness she
added that people don’t know the actual concept of CSR that’s why they are
focusing and mixing it with philanthropy. The officer further rationalized that
the focus should be on free market mechanisms along with open import-export
system to resolve the existing problems. She added that the Government must
keep a reserve part of essential commodities but market mechanisms should
surface the production process so that no one including the Government could
interrupt in market process.
It is evident from the conversations with consumers that stakeholder activism is
lacking in Pakistan hence there is no factor pushing CSR into the businesses. The
spirit of working for a society needs to be awakened.
The term ‘sustainability’ is fearsome to the corporate world as well as growers as
it is usually related to reduced productivity or profit. However this is not the
case measures reducing environmental impacts will more than often also provide
economic benefits for farmers and mills. Awareness of this approach will provide
an opening to reconcile environmental and social needs with the long-term
development of the sugar industry.
Way Forward

The environment of the area in which sugar is produced is damaged in many
ways during the production process including degradation of wildlife, soil, air
and water. This is mainly due to intensive use of water, heavy use of agro-
chemicals, discharge and runoff of polluted effluent and air pollution. An efficient
use of resources is not only environment friendly but also brings about reduction
in major costs for the grower as well as leading to better productivity and yield.
I. Soil
Sugarcane farming also causes soil erosion and hampers its ability for water
retention. Soil erosion risks are worsened when cane is cultivated on slopes and/
or beet is cultivated in such a way that fields are left bare over winter. In agronomic
terms, the loss of soil by erosion affects future yields and limits the sustainability
of sugar crop growing by eradicating organic matter as well as nutrient-rich
material from the soil. The nurturing of sugarcane also disturbs the soil quality;
the impacts include loss of soil organic matter, changes in nutrient levels,
salinization and acidification.
Sugarcane growers rather than beet growers generally face soil salinity issues.
Salinization results from over irrigation, poor drainage and cultivation in flood-
prone lands or in plains where sea water intrusion occurs. Salinity of soil leads to
lower crop yields. It has been discovered that sugarcane yields are almost
significantly 50% lower on soils opened to water logging and salinity than on
fresh unaffected land. Even worse it was estimated that 40% of the cane growing
areas of Pakistan have salinity troubles.
Sustainable systems to maintain and improve soil quality are required not only
to save the environment and protect the society but also to ensure the continuity
of the sugar industry. Soil erosion can be reduces and soil quality may be improved
through a number of measures including: trash mulching in cane cultivation,
maintenance of beet as part of a crop rotation, terracing, contour and strip planting
of cane on slopes, maintenance of ‘live barriers’ (hedgerows, riparian zones), and
modified (reduced or minimum) tillage.48
48 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects-

II. Water
Water is a scarce resource used for several different tasks; it is a serious concern
for manufacturers all over the world. Sugar plantations and mills also bring
about environmental concerns mainly associated with excessive use of water,
water pollution and disposal of the resulting waste. Calculations show that to
produce one ton of cane 3-10 cubic meters of water is required.
The cultivation of sugarcane and sugar beet is a water intensive process.
Processing beets consumes a large amount of water as they need to wash off the
soil from the beets at harvest. Furthermore, agrochemicals and other sediments
used in the cultivation process pollute the waterways and aquatic habitats of the
area in the series. This brings about a significant environmental impact the form
of polluted effluents.
Due to weak environmental laws in some countries sugar mills discharge huge
amounts of waste substances straight into the nearby streams during the annual
cleaning process. These effluents include heavy metals, oil, grease and cleaning
agents. This debris is rich in organic matter; the decomposition of this matter
reduces the oxygen levels in the water damaging the natural biochemical processes
and the inhabitants of these freshwater systems.
As mentioned sugarcane cultivation has excessively water consumption it uses
more water per unit area than any other crop grown in the Indus Basin. Many
dams, barrages and irrigation systems have come into being over the past 60
years in Pakistan leading to a 90 percent decline in the amount of freshwater
reaching the Indus Delta. The Indus Delta supports the world’s largest area of
arid land mangroves, which rely on freshwater. In 1997 there existed 260,000
hectares of mangrove forest now sadly only a 65 percent remains and is dominated
by just one salt-tolerant species.
The mangroves of the Indus Delta provide a nursery for young fish and shrimp,
which in turn is an important source of income for many. Shrimp are a key export
commodity for Pakistan, bringing in 68 percent of the US$100 million of the fish
exports. Around 4 million people have been pushed into the slums of Karachi city
hunting for appropriate jobs as the drought, excessive irrigation and floods have
taken over their businesses of fishing or river boats.
Sugarcane requires about 1500-2000mm/ha/year. Also water is used in the mills
to wash off the significant mass of soil covering the plants. Seventy to even ninety

percent of global freshwater abstractions are for the purpose of irrigation hence
it may be stated that agriculture is the largest consumer of water worldwide.
Irrigation projects are not planned with consideration on environmental or social
needs often resulting in damage to the downstream ecosystems and livelihoods
of communities that rely on fisheries.
The release of waste materials from the sugar mills and the processing of the by-
products such as molasses are proven to be harmful for the species of the
freshwater, diminishing the biodiversity. About 100 years ago, the rare Blind
River Dolphin (Platanista minor) was found throughout the Indus and its branches
it now exists in six totally isolated sub-populations.
Being a deep-rooted crop, which remains in the soil all year round, a sugarcane
crop is able to extract soil water to depths below one meter. At times the crop can
affects river flows as well, it intercepts the rainwater from the catchment into
rivers and taps into ground water resources.
It should be communicated to growers that it is important when determining the
best irrigation system to take into consideration the soil type, climate, farm
management and affordability. The chief irrigation systems available are in the
present technology include surface (flood / furrow), overhead sprinklers (drag
line / centre-pivot) and drip / trickle techniques.
While drip and trickle techniques are likely to be the most water-use efficient, the
technique requires a considerable financial investment. On the other hand surface
techniques are found to be the least efficient but are cheap in terms of cost as they
do not require farm machinery. In most areas only 30-35 percent of the water
reaches the crop while the excess is lost from irrigation channels by evaporation
and through runoff from the field. Due to poor irrigation management a large
amount of water results in runoff containing sediment, pesticides and nutrients.
Additionally, water standing in fields can enhance the incidence of water-borne
parasitic infections such as Bilharzia (schistosomiasis).
To counter the high cost aspect of drip techniques it is found that low-cost drip
systems are available for small-holders moreover it can be assured that micro-
credit is available for purchase of the equipment and sufficient ongoing technical
support. Irrigation scheduling, including the use of tensiometres to monitor soil
moisture, and tail-water recycling (where water-runoff from field is collected
and reused for irrigation) are also ways of improving irrigation management.

Drip fertigation is the use of the drip system of fertilizing, in this way nutrients
are only delivered to the plant base or root reducing fertiliser quantities used.
Soil pesticides can be reduced by 30 percent when applied directly to the root
zone. With this technology the dosage of the toxic drugs is reduced largely.49
To minimize the damages of the gaseous emissions and effluent releasing into
rivers and streams nearby it can be made sure that new mills are located
downwind of populated centres. Another technique to reduce emissions is to dry
the bagasse before using it as boiler fuel this also increases the efficiency of burning.
The method does ask for basic dust control measures but these are cheap and
simple to install in most cases.
Air pollution can further be reduced by using hydrogen peroxide in place of
sulphur dioxide in sugar mills. Moreover the use of hydrogen peroxide also shows
higher quality white sugar without any requirement of new equipment. Odour
control measures are readily available in the management of sugar beet factory
wastes, such as the use of enzymes and organic scavengers for control of H2S.
Still more a range of techniques is identified to minister the sugar mill effluents,
including the treatment of mill sludge with micro-organisms that accelerate the
rate of decomposition.50
III.By-products
In addition the production of alcohol from cane also results in noteworthy
pollution in the form of the by-product, known as ‘vinasse’. Every litre of alcohol
produced from sugarcane produces 13 litres of vinasse. This effluent is discharged
into rivers mostly.
It is important for mills and the Government of Pakistan to realize the efficient
utilities of the by-products. The proper use of by-products can lead to reduction
in cost as well as increase in efficiency and sustainability. Governments should
incentivize use of by-products as well as spread awareness on the subjects. Some
policies can also be enacted on the industrial stage to ensure practices ensuring
the sustainable use of resources. NGOs can also aid to promote education on
production techniques and the utility of by-products.
49 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects-
50 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects-

Vinasse production from beet molasses can however be utilized in animal feed,
as can beet pulp residues, either directly or mixed with molasses and dried.
Moreover this vinasse and treated waste water from sugar cane mills is suitable
for irrigation. There is however a fear that these products might pollute soils and
groundwater and cause salinisation, especially if used in large amounts. Studies
presented that irrigation with cane effluent was found to suppress germination
of peas in Balrampur, India.
Bagasse holds the potential of being an important cellulose source for the
production of chemicals like pentosans (including furfural) and allied substances.
To aid re-vegetation and stabilization of denuded land bagasse can be applied as
trash mulch. Further, it can also be used as an excellent substrate for mushroom
cultivation, with the cultivation residue potentially used in animal feed. Sugar
beet tops can be left on the soil surface of fields, as a source of nitrogen for the next
crop in the rotation.
Fly ash extracted from boiler chimney gas also shows its use as a filtration aid in
the sugar mill as well as in removal of certain pesticides from wastewater.51
IV. Fertilizers
Nitrogenous fertilisers are applied to sugarcane in many areas at around 50-
200kg/ha/year, this leads to the process of soil acidification. These fertilizers are
expensive and also reduce crop yield. Sugar industries should advice
recommendations on fertiliser use and guide farmers.
Fertiliser use can be reduced through a number of practices including a more site
specific assessment of fertiliser requirements, cultivation of leguminous green
manure crops during fallow periods or in rotation, the use of biofertilisers
(combinations of nitrogenfixing micro-organisms and organic amendments),
green cane harvesting and press mud, a sugar cane mill by-product which is
particularly effective for reducing phosphorus deficiency in cane.
Mills can provide the farmers of their region the press mud, a phosphorous rich
byproduct, for free or at minimal rates as well as provide education on the topics
convincing the growers that better management can lead to benefits for the
51 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects-

environment, surrounding community as well as the profit margins of the mills
and the farmers. Financial returns can be promoted through increased yields,
sustained soil health, reduced inputs and enhanced quality of production. Research
has shown that countries like Pakistan and India are phosphorus deficient; this
biofertilizer can attempt to fulfill this lack in deficiency.
The assessment of foliar nutrient levels and adjustment of fertilizer rate is also
possible through crop logging, used to monitor plant weight and leaf nutrient
content.
Efficient use of water resources can lead to higher farm productivity (more crop
per drop), benefits for local communities (more drop per person) and the
environment (more drop per ecosystem). It will also bring about wider socio-
economic development; water will be available for other uses such as fisheries or
ecotourism.52
Barriers Expected
There will be barriers constraining the implementation of such beneficial practices.
The foremost obstacle is the lack of incentives for performance such as realistic
charges for water used and reliability of irrigation water delivery. The information
blockage presented in terms of the communication gaps. Moreover, it is also realized
that the poor generally has no easy access to (micro) finance for investment.
Policies working for the promotion of sustainable sugar production are lacking
not only at the regional level but also at national and international grounds.
The Government
The Government and/or the mills should aim to support providers of sugarcane
integrated training programmes are desperately needed in the sector. Mills can
also persuade practices that benefit themselves and the farmers, for instance the
use of mill by-products for soil improvement.
Policies measures should also be considered by the Government. The Government
needs to strictly implement laws on sucrose-based payments for farmers instead
of cane-weight, improved irrigation water allocation, defined water rights for
52 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects-

farmers, and the possibility to sell or barter any excess water. Furthermore, charges
should be levied for polluting water bodies.
Government policies and reforms are required, establishment of sugarcane
breeding station on international standards and research stations.53 Farmers
suggested that the government should help the farmers form a union so that they
have access to a platform where they can raise their problems and they are heard
and thought for. In the National Industrial Policy 2011- Implementation
framework- the quality compliance is focused. It suggests that tax incentives
should be used to encourage private sector to set up quality testing and
certification laboratory facilities in all sectors especially those relating to textiles,
sugar, leather and pulp and paper sectors.
The Civil Society
Local and international NGOs can also play an active role by encouraging the
dialogue between extension, research centres, innovative farmers, sugar mills
and banks for the development of research experiments. Local NGOs can help
establish cooperative farming methods and provide platforms to farmer
organizations. These organizations can then find ways to increase economic
returns to farmers and spread beneficial knowledge.
The Corporate Sector
Industry associations such as PSMA can develop support programmes. South
African Sugar Association (SASA), or those of the Australian Canegrowers Council
provides guidelines to the growers of sugarcane.54 The global corporate sector
can offer support through their purchasing decisions by developing a unique
approach for sugar sourcing that encourages CSR adoption.
53 Pakkisan.com
54 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects-

Annex 1
Questionnaire for the Sugar Mill Managers
I. Basic Information About CSR
1. How would you define corporate social responsibility?
2. Do you think that philanthropy is the only component of the CSR?
3. Do you think there is need of CSR in Pakistan?
4. Do you have a model of CSR?
5. What is your CSR model?
6. What barriers you find in implementation of CSR?
7. Are there any laws or/and govt. obligations implacable to your industry?
8. Does the government ensure the CSR practice in Pakistan?
9. What is your strategy for effective implementation of CSR?

10. Is there any self imposing social responsibility code of the conduct for your unit? If yes please
provide a copy of that?
11. What ethical principals or code of conduct are in your industry?
None 
12. What is your corporate governance model?
None 
13. Do you have a disclosure and reporting strategy?
14. In Europe business organizations and their stakeholders are taking collaborative actions for
15. What impact do you think you have on the society?
None 
16. Do you know about:
ISO 14000 standard for environmental management systems,
SA 8000 social accountability standard
The Global Reporting Initiative guidelines for sustainability
17. Have you ever conducted a social audit, if yes please provide your social report?
18. Do you work with any institution (governments, non-government or/and communities) to improve
the quality of life?

II. Year 2007-2008
19. How would you explain the year 2007-2008 for the sugar industry?
20. Was there any bumper stock of sugarcane in this year?
21. What happened to this bumper stock?
III. The Process of Sugar Production
22. Do you promote fair competition?
23. A procurement rate for sugarcane is set (there is no competition among the factories) do you
24. Do you think the process ensuring supply of sugarcane in sugar making (the indent) is fair?
25. Usually there is a delay in the crushing process, for what reasons?
26. The weight of the sugarcane cannot be challenged or verified by a neutral party, (the sugarcane
27. Who pays the Cess on procurement of sugarcane?
28. Are there any deductions from the farmers?

29. Is there any deduction depending on the quality of sugarcane? If yes, how is the rate determined
30. Is this deduction on the basis of quality of sugarcane legally correct?
31. What are the most popular reasons for crop failure?
32. Who bears the cost of crop failure?
33. What are the most common diseases that attack sugarcane?
34. Does the mill provide seeds to farmers? If yes does it also provide fungicides?
Yes the mill provides seeds and fungicides
No the mill doesn’t provide seeds and fungicides
Yes the mill provides seeds only
Yes the mill provides fungicides only
35. Do you provide any training or advice to farmers for the better productivity of crop?

36. Who dominate sugarcane cultivation in Pakistan? Please tick one.
Small sized farmers
Medium sized farmers
Large sized farmers
37. Do you consider the payment process to farmers as efficient and fair?
38. If there is a delay in payment, why is it so?
39. Do you think this delay has negative consequences for the farmers?
40. There are agents who offer the farmers a trouble free passage for their stock and a prompt
IV. Gur-making Market
41. Do you think the traditional gur making should be permissible?
42. The Sugarcane Act 1934 banned gur making in many ‘reserved area’ and prohibited farmers to
sell their produce to any other buyer but the particular mill, do you think this was fair?
43. Where does the demand for gur lie?
V. Accessibility
44. Sugar is a necessity, edible good, is there any mechanism ensuring that the entire population of
the country has access to this necessity?
45. Do the poorest of the nation also have access to this necessity?

46. What mechanisms are in place to ensure this?
47. The Benazir Income Support Program and the Utility Stores Corporation are promising to

Questionnaire for Competition Commission
VI. Basic Information about CSR
48. How would you define corporate social responsibility?
49. Do you think that philanthropy is the only component of the CSR?
50. Do you think there is need of CSR in Pakistan?
51. What barriers you find in implementation of CSR?
52. Are there any laws or/and govt. obligations ensuring CSR?
53. Does the Commission ensure the CSR practice in Pakistan?
54. What is your strategy for effective implementation of CSR?
55. In Europe business organizations and their stakeholders are taking collaborative actions for
Annex 2

VII. Year 2007-2008 in the Sugar Industry
56. How would you explain the year 2007-2008 for the sugar industry?
57. Many farmers burnt their sugarcane stock, why?
58. Do you think burning the ripe crop was their only choice?
59. It was established that PSMA and its member undertakings were in violation under Section 4
of the Ordinance, in particular Section 4(1) read with Section 4(2) (a), (b), (c) and (e) of the
Ordinance, according to an enquiry report (Oct 2009). What consequences followed this enquiry?
VIII. The Process of Sugar Production
60. A procurement rate for sugarcane is set (there is no competition among the factories) do you
61. Do you think the process ensuring supply of sugarcane in sugar making (the indent) is fair?
62. Usually there is a delay in the crushing process, for what reasons?
63. The weight of the sugarcane cannot be challenged or verified by a neutral party, (the sugarcane
64. Who pays the Cess on procurement of sugarcane?
65. Are there any deductions faced by the farmers?

66. Is there any deduction depending on the quality of sugarcane? If yes, how is the rate determined
67. Does this deduction enjoy legal cover?
68. Do you consider the payment process to farmers as efficient and fair?
69. There is usually a delay in payment, why is it so?
70. Do you think this delay has negative consequences for the farmers?
71. There are agents who offer the farmers a trouble free passage for their stock and a prompt
payment, who are these agents? Does the Commission encourage this practice?
72. Do you think the traditional gur making should be permissible?
73. The Sugarcane Act 1934 banned gur making in many ‘reserved area’ and prohibited farmers to
sell their produce to any other buyer but the particular mill, do you think this was fair?
74. Do you think gur exports to Afghanistan should be banned?
75. Do you think the ban on gur making or/and exporting will have negative impacts on the
traditional gur makers?

76. If yes, who do you think is responsible for these negative consequences?
77. Sugar is a necessity, edible good, is there any mechanism ensuring that the entire population of
the country has access to this necessity?
78. Do the poorest of the nation also have access to this necessity?
79. What mechanisms are in place to ensure this?
80.The Benazir Income Support Program and the Utility Stores Corporation are promising to

Questionnaire for PSMA
IX. Basic Information about CSR
81. How would you define corporate social responsibility?
82. Do you think that philanthropy is the only component of the CSR?
83. Do you think there is need of CSR in Pakistan?
84. Do you have a model of CSR?
85. What is your CSR model?
86. What barriers you find in implementation of CSR?
87. Are there any laws or/and govt. obligations implacable to your industry?
88. Does the government ensure the CSR practice in Pakistan?
89. What is your strategy for effective implementation of CSR?
Annex 3

90. Is there any self imposing social responsibility code of the conduct for your unit? If yes please
provide a copy of that?
91. What ethical principals or code of conduct are in your industry?
None 
92. What is your corporate governance model?
None 
93. Do you have a disclosure and reporting strategy?
94. In Europe business organizations and their stakeholders are taking collaborative actions for
95. What impact do you think you have on the society?
None 
96. Do you know about:
ISO 14000 standard for environmental management systems,
SA 8000 social accountability standard
The Global Reporting Initiative guidelines for sustainability
97. Have you ever conducted a social audit, if yes please provide your social report?
98. Do you work with any institution (governments, non-government or/and communities) to
improve the quality of life?

X. Year 2007-2008
99. How would you explain the year 2007-2008 for the sugar industry?
100. Many farmers burnt their sugarcane stock, why?
101. Do you think burning the ripe crop was their only choice?
102. It was established that PSMA and its members were in violation under Section 4 of the
Ordinance, in particular Section 4(1) read with Section 4(2) (a), (b), (c) and (e) of the Ordinance,
according to an enquiry report (Oct 2009). Comment please.
XI. The process of sugar production
103. Do you promote fair competition?
104. A procurement rate for sugarcane is set (there is no competition among the factories) do you
105 Do you think the process ensuring supply of sugarcane in sugar making (the indent) is fair?
106. Usually there is a delay in the crushing process, for what reasons?
107. The weight of the sugarcane cannot be challenged or verified by a neutral party, (the sugarcane
108. Who pays the Cess on procurement of sugarcane?08
109. Are there any deductions faced by the farmers?

110. Is there any deduction depending on the quality of sugarcane? If yes, how is the rate determined
Comments
111. Does this deduction enjoy legal cover?
112. What are the most popular reasons for crop failure?
113. Who bears the cost of crop failure?
114. What are the most common diseases that attack sugarcane?
115.The mill provides seeds usually to the farmers it gives the indent to, does it also provide any
fungicides?
116.Do you provide any training or advice to farmers for the better productivity of crop?

117.Do you consider the payment process to farmers as efficient and fair?
118. There is usually a delay in payment, why is it so?
119. Do you think this delay has negative consequences for the farmers?
120. Who dominate sugarcane cultivation in Pakistan? Please tick one.
Small sized farmers
Medium sized farmers
Large sized farmers
121. There are agents who offer the farmers a trouble free passage for their stock and a prompt
XII. Gur-making Market
122. Do you think the traditional gur making should be permissible?
123. The Sugarcane Act 1934 banned gur making in many ‘reserved area’ and prohibited farmers
to sell their produce to any other buyer but the particular mill, do you think this was fair?
124. Do you think gur exports to Afghanistan should be banned?
125. Do you think the ban on gur making or/and exporting will have negative impacts on the
traditional gur makers?
126. If yes, who do you think is responsible for these negative consequences?

XIII. Accessibility
127. Sugar is a necessity, edible good, is there any mechanism ensuring that the entire population
of the country has access to this necessity?
128. Do the poorest of the nation also have access to this necessity?
129.What mechanisms are in place to ensure this?
130. The Benazir Income Support Program and the Utility Stores Corporation are promising to

Questionnaire for Farmers
131. To which sugar mill do provide your sugarcane produce?
132. Do you know of any institution (governments, non-government or/and communities) which
works to improve the quality of crops, productivity? Please identify, if yes.
133. What is the size of your landholdings?
Less than 5 acres
5-50 acres
More than 50 acres
XIV. Year 2007-2008
134. How would you explain the year 2007-2008 for the sugar industry?
135. There was a bumper stock in this year what happened to this stock?
XV. The process of Sugar Production
136. On how much land do you cultivate sugarcane?
137. How much irrigation is required for a sugarcane crop in one crop year?
Less than 40 times a year
40-50 times a year
More than 50 times a year
138. What are the main issues faced by farming community with millers?
139. What are the main issues faced by farming community with the government?
140. A procurement rate for sugarcane is set (there is no competition among the factories) do you
have any issues with this?
Annex 4

141. Do you have any say in price fixation?
142. Do you think the process ensuring supply of sugarcane in sugar making (the indent) is fair?
143. Usually there is a delay in the crushing process, for what reasons?
144.The weight of the sugarcane cannot be challenged or verified by a neutral party, (the sugarcane
145. Who pays the Cess on procurement of sugarcane?
146. Are there any deductions from the farmers by millers?
147. Is there any deduction depending on the quality of sugarcane? If yes, how is the rate determined
148. Is this deduction legally correct?

149.What are the most popular reasons for crop failure?
150. Do you have any crop insurance? Please provide details for the option you choose.
Explanation:
151. Who bears the cost of crop failure?
152. What are the most common diseases that attack sugarcane?
153. Does the mill provide seeds to farmers? If yes does it also provide fungicides?
Yes the mill provides seeds and fungicides
No the mill doesn’t provide seeds and fungicides
Yes the mill provides seeds only
Yes the mill provides fungicides only
154. Does the mill provide any input/training or advice to farmers for the better productivity of
crop?
155. Do you consider the payment process to farmers as efficient and fair?

156.If there is a delay in payment, why is it so?
157. There are agents who offer the farmers a trouble free passage for their stock and a prompt
XVI. Gur-making market
158. Who do you prefer selling your stock to?
Gur-makers
159. Do you think the traditional gur making should be permissible?
160.The Sugarcane Act 1934 banned gur making in many ‘reserved area’ and prohibited farmers
to sell their produce to any other buyer but the particular mill, do you think this was fair?

Questionnaire for end Users
161. Do you consider sugar as a necessity?
162. Are you aware how sugar is produced?
163. Is this process of sugar production fair?
164. Are the sugar mills doing philanthropy in any form?
165. Are the mills (CSR) Corporate Social Responsibility compliant?
Don’t know
166. Have you participated in any of the activity to force them to perform CSR?
Annex 5

167. Did you participate in the Sugar Boycott 5-12 November 2009?
168. What happened in the production year of 2007-2008 in the sugar industry?
169. Do you think they have some motive other than profit?
170. Do you think the sugar mills have any social responsibilities? If yes, please specify.

SANSAR
South Asia Network for Sustainability and Responsibility
Organizations of South East Asia promoting Corporate Social Responsibility such as CSR
Centre (Bangladesh), Sustainable Development Policy Institute (Pakistan), Centre for Afghan
Civil Society Support (Afghanistan) have come together to launch new platform called SANSAR
along with Prakruthi (India). The whole idea to make sure that a platform for discussing and
promoting sustainability and CSR issues in South Asian Countries has been well supported by
OXFAM NOVIB, The Netherlands. This was also well received by other organizations from
Nepal, Sri Lanka and Indonesia.
SANSAR's core strategy is to make stakeholders redefine and commonly understand the
concept of CSR and promote it actively to address social, environmental and business related
issues across the globe & sectors in the long run. To achieve this, SANSAR employs strategies
such as policy outreach, activism capacity building, research ·and networking. The above
pages document the initial research work done in sugar sector, which visibly affects lives of
large number of population in these countries. While trying to identify with the CSR issues in
counties which are at different levels of understanding and praxis of sustainability issues, we
create a platform to discuss, share, learn and implement CSR to reduce structural poverty. This
would not have been possible without the help of many like-minded people.
I would like to thank Dr. Abid Suleri of SDPI Pakistan, Shahamin Zaman of CSR Centre
Bangladesh, Mujeeb Niazi of Centre for Afghan Civil Society Support, Afghanistan who have
extended their whole-hearted support even within their busy schedules to make the pillars for
this network made. We are hoping that more and more organisations would join this network to
realize our collective dream of a peaceful and prosperous South Asia.
I would like to, in this regard, extend our sincere thanks to Mr. Viraf Mehta, Dr Shatadru
Chattopadhayay, Dr Bimal Arora, Prof. VasanthiSrinivasan, Dr MC Gopinathan in helping
us with their valuable inputs and guidance whenever needed.
Pramod John
Prakruthi , India
27th March 2012