brief about the campaign, its purpose, benefits, challenges regarding their orientation, complete cooperation and confidence building during execution of the campaign. Meetings (Level 3) These meetings shall be arranged as mega meetings/seminars with farmers, dealers and owners of cotton sticks heaps. This practice shall continue from October to December for Phase-1 and from January to March for Phase-II of every year. District, Tehsil and sector in-charge i.e. Deputy Director of Agri. (Ext.), Assistant Director of Agriculture (Ext.), and Agriculture Officers shall arrange these meetings at ground level for awareness, orientation, convincing farmer community for this national cause. Deployment of staff This activity should be performed in the form of a mega campaign and staff of whole district should be concentrated in one tehsil at least for one week each month from October to December for Phase-1 and from January to March for Phase-II of every year. OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR AGRICULTURE EXTENSION MULTAN ORDER As per directions of Additional Secretary Task Force Agriculture Department Punjab Lahore in meeting held on 30.01.2020 at MRI, Multan. The following field staff of District Multan is hereby temporarily deputed at Mouzas/ Villages of Tehsil Shujabad for effective campaign of Offseason Management of Pink Bollworm with immediate effect till further order. They shall be responsible for identificattion of Cotton sticks heaps, removal of leftover bolls from Cotton sticks heaps, preparation of list of owners of these Heaps and serving of notices under section 144 for removal of leftover bolls. They shall also be responsibles for the identification and establishment of collection centres for purchase and sale of leftover bolls for the Brick klins in their assigned areas Raja Ram Zahid Tanveer 0305-9637156 Shehroz Zahid Basti Dad Zafar Iqbal Chattha 0300-7318349 Ghulam Yasin Khalar Abdul Rehman 0302-3500936 Haji Abdul Majeed Wahi Noon Zafar Hussain Bazmi 0302-4946581