TABLE OF CONTENTS Page # Preamble Introduction Life Cycle of Pink Bollworm Management of Pink Bollworm Management Plan Stage-I Legal Stage-II Orientation Stage-III Awareness Campaign Stage-IV Preparation Stage-V Execution Stage-VI Reporting and Follow up Stage-VII Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Stage-VIII Results and Discussion Author and Editor Ali Arshad Rana MA, LLB Additional Secretary (Task Force), Agriculture Department, Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab, Lahore Co-Editor Syed Ismat Hussain M. Sc. (Hons.), Agricultural Entomology Agriculture Officer (PP) Pest Warning & QCP, Multan Experts Consulted Prof. Dr. Shafqat Saeed, PhD. Agricultural Entomology, Korea Dean Faculty of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences Director, Institute of Plant Protection MNS University of Agriculture, Multan Dr. Amir Rasul, PhD. Agricultural Entomology Associate Professor Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture University of Agriculture, Faisalabad Dr. Sagheer Ahmad PhD. Plant Breeding & Genetics Director Cotton Research Institute, Multan Dr. Muhammad Aslam PhD. Agricultural Entomology, Director, Pest Warning & QCP, Multan PREAMBLE Cotton production in Pakistan is vital for economic development of the country. We are largely dependent on the cotton industry and the related ginning and textile sector. The country witnessed record production of cotton of 15 million bales in the year 2011. But it has shown a steady decline in the following years limiting its production to 7-8 million bales per annum in the following years to follow. One of the main reasons for this decline is the increasing attack of pests. Among these pests, pink bollworm is one of the most destructive pests of cotton crop. After getting shelter inside the cotton boll, most of the insecticides are unable to manage larvae of Pink bollworm. No pesticide spray proves effective against the larvae of the pink bollworm because of its concealed feeding inside the bolls. In previous few years, efforts were made to control it through cultural practices, however,