the progress or delay of the ongoing assessed activities. An evaluation is an examination concerning the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and impact of activities in the light of specified objectives.  Additional Secretary (Task Force) shall monitor this campaign in Punjab.  Director General, Agriculture (Ext. & AR) shall be overall in-charge of the campaign. in close coordination with  The Director General, Pest Warning shall be the Coordinator of the campaign.  Directors, Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors of Agriculture Extension department shall be divisional, district and tehsil supervisors respectively and shall supervise the campaign.  For counterchecking and monitoring of this campaign, the cotton growing divisions shall be allocated to the senior officers of the Agriculture Department as per the following details: Area Overall Punjab Additional Secretary (TF), Punjab Bahawalpur Division Director General, Pest Warning & QCP, Punjab Dera Ghazi Khan Division Director, Cotton Research Institute, Multan Multan Division Director General, Extension and AR, Punjab Sahiwal Division Director General, Water Management, Punjab Faisalabad Division Director General, Research, Punjab Sargodha Division Director General, Research, Punjab Stage-VIII RESULTS & DISCUSSION The purpose of a Results section is to present the key results of this campaign. Results and discussions can either be combined into one section or organized as separate sections depending on the requirements. The results of this campaign collected through daily, weekly, monthly and annual reports shall be complied, analyzed, evaluated by Agriculture Statistics department each year till April. Agri information department shall be held responsible for publication of the results and distribution amongst all related wings, private sector and mainstream media. The results and discussion sections are one of the challenging sections to write. It is important to plan this section carefully as it may contain a large amount of data that needs to be presented in a clear and