of effective communication to reach the desired outcome. The combination of these communication strategies for a targeted audience for a given period can broadly be described as ‘awareness raising campaign’. The aim of awareness raising campaigns most often includes increase concern, informing the targeted audience, creating a positive image, and attempts to change their behaviour. Raising awareness is not only important at the first stages of the process but is integral throughout the process to maintain and increase the general level of awareness. Awareness campaigns can address groups of people in a region affected by a particular threat, groups of stakeholders, the general public etc. The ultimate aim of such campaigns is to achieve long-term lasting behavioural changes. Awareness raising addresses the knowledge of individuals and organisations. It aims to ensure that all relevant regional and sub-regional bodies understand the impacts of, and take action to respond to a certain problem. However they can also focus on a certain impact that is considered as the most tremendous. Campaigns are mostly considered as effective if several ways of communication are served: dissemination of printed materials; organisation of public meetings and training; professional consultation; communication and information through social and mass- media; using informal networks for information dissemination. It can be combined with the establishment of community self-protection teams that promote self-reliance among the farmers to minimize the risk to personal safety and property damage.  Every year, a comprehensive awareness campaign shall be launched regarding off season management of pink bollworm. The campaign shall last from 1st Oct to 31st Dec and 1st Jan to 31st Mar for Phase-I and Phase II respectively.  The campaign shall contain the introduction of pink boll worm, its damages, overwintering stage and social responsibility of owners of heaps, owners of ginning factories, owners of