is compulsory. Biological Control The biological control includes development of resistant varieties and incorporation of latest Bt genes (boll guard III); development of tolerant and early maturing varieties to escape the attack of pink bollworm and conservation of natural enemies by avoiding unnecessary application of chemicals especially pyrithroid. Parasitoids This documents is for local community. it will be better to mention only local predators and parasitoids reported from Pakistan. During the past 80 years, 160 species in 43 genera of parasitic Hymenoptera have been collected with or reared from pink bollworm infested cotton. The genera Apanteles, Bracon, Brachymeria, Chelonus and Elasmus among the parasitic Hymenoptera contribute numerous species of potentially useful pink bollworm parasitoids. Insecticide applications eventually eliminated attempts to biologically control pink bollworm. Insecticides represent the primary control measure which has been successful in limiting preventing damage of pink bollworm in commercial cotton. However, during more than 40 years of application, insecticides have not solved the problem of pink bollworm infestation anywhere in the world. Each growing season finds pink bollworm present and developing resistance to toxic compounds. Predators Green lacewing, Spiders, Coccinellids, dragon flies, wasps, damselflies, and lady beetles were the major predators of pests of cotton. All of the common predators in cotton fields are capable of feeding on pink bollworm eggs and first instar larvae. Studies show that several groups of arthropods attack pink bollworm naturally. They include mites, predaceous Dermaptera, Hemiptera, Coleoptera and Neuroptera. The egg stage is most vulnerable to attack by predators because it is relatively more exposed when as compared to larvae and pupae. Most predators lack morphological modification of the legs and mouthparts necessary to penetrate bolls to feed on pink bollworm larvae. The dermapteran Labidura riparia (Pallas) attacks all immature stages of pink bollworm including the pupa. However, this predator