shall attend this session. Director Information, Director P&E, Director CRI, Director CCRI, Vice Chancellor, University of Agri. Faisalabad, Vice Chancellor, MNS University of Agriculture Multan, all Directors of Agri. Ext. and Pest Warning of Cotton Zone, progressive growers, representatives of Crop Life and PCPA shall also attend this orientation session.  The subsequent orientation sessions shall be held at division, district and tehsil level by respective Directors of Agri. (Ext.), Deputy Directors of Agri. (Ext.) and Assistant Directors of Agri. (Ext.) respectively within a period of seven days.  Divisional orientation session shall be attended by all Deputy Directors of Agri. Extension and Pest Warning.  District orientation session shall be attended by all Assistant Directors of Agri. Extension and Pest Warning.  District orientation session shall be attended by all Agri. Officers and Field Assistants of Agri. Extension and Pest Warning. Stage-III AWARENESS CAMPAIGN This measure encompasses actions that promote awareness for the altered conditions under problem and adaptation. However, not all stakeholders are aware and informed about their vulnerability and the measures they can take to pro-actively adapt to the problem. Awareness raising is therefore an important component of the adaptation process to manage the impacts of problem, enhance adaptive capacity, and reduce overall vulnerability. Public awareness is important to increase enthusiasm and support, stimulate self- mobilisation and action, and mobilise local knowledge and resources. Raising political awareness is important as policy makers and politicians are key actors in the policy process of adaptation. Awareness raising requires strategies of effective communication to reach the desired outcome. The combination of these communication strategies for a targeted audience for a given period can broadly be described as ‘awareness raising campaign’. The aim of awareness raising campaigns most often includes increase concern, informing the targeted audience, creating a positive image, and