estimated from 25 randomly selected plants by recording the number of bugs from five bolls of each plant. Cotton leaf curl virus incidence was noted by observing symptoms from 100 plants. Sampling of chewing insects American bollworm (Helicoverpa armigera) and spotted bollworm (Earis insulana and E. vitella.) live larvae was recorded on fruiting bodies of randomly selected 25 cotton plants viz., five consecutive plants from five different places per block). Pink bollworm (Pectinophora gossypiella) infestation was recorded by dissecting 100 bolls per block and counting the healthy as well as damaged bolls. Percent infestation was calculated by dividing the total and damaged number of bolls. For armyworm (Spodoptera spp.) spots were recorded on its appearance. Data analysis A place was considered a hot spot where the pest population was found at and above Economic Threshold Level (ETL). Hot spots for each tehsil (Alipur, Jatoi, Kot Addu and Muzaffargarh) were determined on a weekly basis. The spots were numbered as above and below ETL for each pest of each tehsil. Then, the combined infestation of insect pests and CLCuV was calculated at the district level. To evaluate the influence of weather factors on the cotton insect pests population and CLCuV incidence meteorological data, i.e., minimum temperature, maximum temperature and relative humidity (%), were obtained from the weather record of the Agriculture Extension Department of District Muzzafargarh (Table 1). Correlation of hot spots number, insect pests population and CLCuV with individual abiotic factors was computed with Statistica by StatSoft. The relationship between weather factors, i.e., maximum and minimum temperature (°C) and relative humidity (%) with insect pests and CLCuV hot spots were evaluated using multiple regression analysis. Results and Discussion Whitefly (Bemesia tabaci) The mean percentage of whitefly hot spots ranged from 8.36-24.14% during 2018-2020. The whitefly population was highest in 2020