Insect Pests and Leaf Curl Virus (CLCuV) in Relation to Weather Parameters in Muzaffargarh, Punjab, Pakistan Various restraints contribute to this fact. Insect pests are one of the primary menaces to cotton production (Ahmad et al., 2011). Worldwide, 162 insect pest species have been documented that feed on different cotton growth stages (Kannan et al., 2004). Generally, insect pest composite on the cotton crop is divided into two groups; sucking and chewing insect pest complex. Jassid (Amrasca devastans Distant), whitefly (Bemesia tabaci Gennadius) and thrips (Thrips tabaci Lindeman) are the most precarious sucking pests that suck cell sap of leaves and ultimately damage the food producing unit, while dusky cotton bug (Oxacarenus laetus Kirby) and red cotton bug (Dysdercus cingulatus Fabricius) cause the reduction in seed germination and lint quality. Among chewing pests, pink (Pectinophora gossypiella Saunders), American (Helicoverpa armigera Hubner) and spotted bollworm (Earis insulana and E. vitella.) are boll feeders (Babar et al., 2013). On average, these insect pests cause 5-10% yield loss, increasing up to 40-50% in severe situations (Chaudhary, 1976). In addition to these pests, the cotton leaf curl virus (CLCuV) is another serious threat liable for massive losses to cotton crop (Farooq et al., 2011). To protect the cotton crop from these menaces, growers primarily depend on synthetic insecticides. Cotton is the topmost receiver of pesticides in Pakistan, receiving for almost 62% of the total pesticide consumption (Khan et al., 2010). Insecticides usage not only creates health risks and environmental contamination but also leads to insecticidal resistance and disruption of the natural equilibrium in agroecosystems (Ahmad and Khan, 1991; Hamburg and Guest, 1997; Sorejani, 1998). Therefore, only proper pest monitoring and their prediction can mitigate the situations of high pest pressure owing to timely management. Pest monitoring is a prime step in developing an appropriate