insecticidal resistance and disruption of the natural equilibrium in agroecosystems (Ahmad and Khan, 1991; Hamburg and Guest, 1997; Sorejani, 1998). Therefore, only proper pest monitoring and their prediction can mitigate the situations of high pest pressure owing to timely management. Pest monitoring is a prime step in developing an appropriate Integrated Pest Management (IPM) program. Insect pests can be monitored through various tools, i.e., light traps, colored sticky traps, pheromone traps, suction traps and pitfall traps. The data generated from pest monitoring could then be used for ecological investigations, studying the timing of pest influx into agroecosystem, tracing insect migration, initiating sampling procedures and field scouting, determining proper timing for insecticide applications, and the prediction of future generations depending upon the size of previous generations (Lewis, 1981; Crummay and Atkinson 1997; Drake et al., 2002; Zalucki and Furlong, 2005; Hirao et al., 2008; Klueken et al., 2009; Merril et al., 2010). Forecast for pests is an important constituent of any IPM strategy. Pest forecasts and timely warnings depending on biophysical techniques provide time for managing future pest attacks and can thus reduce yield losses, optimize pest control and minimize the cultivation costs. Abiotic factors such as relative humidity, temperature, and rainfall play a significant role in the population fluctuation of insect pests. These climatic parameters severely affect spatial distribution, behavioral and physiological features (Kingsolver, 1989). Theoretical ecologists primarily focused on climatic factors to develop a pest forecasting model (Wallner, 1987). These models are formulated to make farmers aware of future insect pests outbreaks for effective preventive measures to counter pest attack (Hameed et al., 2014). General and anticipated weather information can help plan crops, developing spray schedules and managing farm activities to increase crop returns and yields. The development of long term monitoring spatial data on crop–pest–weather relationships will narrow