research studies have been conducted to unveil different challenges thus, the literature was further grouped into different sections such as (i) environmental constraints (ii) water management constraints (iii) agronomic constraints (iv), socio-economic constraints. Under the environmental constraints, soil salinity and waterlogging, soil fertility depletion and climatic impacts are discussed. Environmental constraints Soil Salinity and waterlogging Soil salinity refers to the state, when excessive salts accumulate inside the soil and adversely harm the physical, chemical and biological properties of the soil. Around the world, 831Mha was reported as salt affected. Of this total salt-affected area, 397 Mha was saline and 434 Mha was sodic (Hasanuzzaman et al., 2014). For Pakistan, 4.5Mha area was regarded salt affected (Aslam, 2016). Pakistan is an agrarian country where tube well irrigation is seen as more accessible. Due to saline ground water and use of poor-quality tube well water for irrigation purpose, the level of salinity surged (Qureshi et al., 2008). Findings were endorsed by the report of Pakistan Council of Science and Technology (2003), as the report found 70 percent of the tube wells of Indus basin impelled sodic or saline-sodic water. The total saline or saline sodic area reached to 2.3 Mha. This intense salinity had adverse impacts on growth of plants. Shahzad et al. (2019) confined that the escalated level of salinity accompanying the high electrical conductivity (EC) caused dehydration in plant cells, diminished the plant growth and sometimes the death of plants occurred particular those which were considerably less tolerant. Salinity has direct adverse impacts on cotton plant growth process because of its moderate tolerance to salinity. The threshold level of cotton regarding salt tolerance was 7.7 dSm-1 (Zhang et al., 2013). Soil salinity inversely influence the cotton yield, growth and fiber quality and pertaining to salt stress delayed flowering, less fruiting,