study, Raghavan (2008) rising input costs, sluggish marketing system and lack of sources to support livelihoods were barriers in wake of cotton production. Pertaining to many plights, farmers were ineffective in getting targeted yield of cotton. Financial limitations, exertion in accessing the credit, access to extension advisory services and inadequate level of formal education were factors suppressing the cotton yield (Wei et al., 2020). Saeed et al. (2020) found that farmers had lack of information regarding agricultural inputs (Hassan et al., 2021) and their use hindered farmers to prepare quality seed for the cotton crop. Number of research studies such as Makhdum (2011), Watto and Mugera (2015) and Zulfiqar and Thapa (2016) have reported that majority of the farming masses in Pakistan are still practicing traditional agriculture. Farmers are also producing cotton production through traditional production practices (using excessive inputs, high dose of fertilizers and excessive application water for irrigation). Consequently, the cost of production has increased excessively, and resources use efficiency remained very low (Makhdum, 2011; Watto and Mugera, 2015; Zulfiqar et al., 2017). CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS The economic value of the cotton crop for Pakistan is momentous and to facilitate the cotton led industry and the livelihoods of the farmers, the emergent need is to expedite the cotton production. The area, production and yield of the cotton in Punjab province and Pakistan is gradually changing inversely. The area has started to decline continuously and production is facing the same decline in Punjab province particularly. The average yield in the Punjab province has drastically declined. Whereas, In Pakistan, the area, production and yield are declining a well. This implies that Pakistan may become cotton scarce and dependence on imports will increase to run textile sector. From 2015, the change in area, production ad yield declined more severely. Environmental constraints