negatively correlated with maximum and minimum temperature and positively correlated with jassid and thrips. Relative humidity exhibited a positive association with all the insect pests and CLCuV incidence. Multiple regression analysis was used to estimate the combined as well as individual impact of maximum and minimum temperature and relative humidity on population fluctuation of insect pests. The R2 values indicated that maximum and minimum temperature were the most influential factors and played a significant role in the population fluctuation of the studied insect pests as well as CLCuV. The results of the study may be helpful to the pest managers as a pest forecasting tool for initiating management strategies at appropriate time during the cotton season. Muhammad Nasir1, Muhammad Usman Asif2*, Abdul Hayee Abid1, Qurat ul Ain Haneef1 and Muhammad Awais2 1Pest Warning and Quality Control of Pesticides, Punjab Agriculture Department, Lahore, Pakistan; 2Plant Protection Division, Nuclear Institute of Agriculture, Tandojam, Pakistan. Received | April 22, 2021; Accepted | August 05, 2021; Published | August 25, 2021 *Correspondence | Muhammad Usman Asif, Plant Protection Division, Nuclear Institute of Agriculture, Tandojam, Pakistan; Email: uakhan1987@hotmail.com Citation | Nasir, M., M. U. Asif, A. H. Abid, Q-u-A. Haneef and M. Awais. 2021. Spatial survey of cotton (gossypium hirsutum L.) insect pests and leaf curl virus (CLCuV) in relation to weather parameters in Muzaffargarh, Punjab, Pakistan. Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Research, 34(4): 713-724. DOI | https://dx.doi.org/10.17582/journal.pjar/2021/34.4.713.724 Keywords | Population dynamics, CLCuV, Relative humidity, Temperature, Multiple regression, Correlation Spatial Survey of Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) Insect Pests and Leaf Curl Virus (CLCuV) in Relation to Weather Parameters in Muzaffargarh, Punjab, Pakistan Various restraints contribute to this fact. Insect pests are one of the primary menaces to cotton production (Ahmad et al., 2011). Worldwide, 162 insect pest species have been documented that feed on different cotton