The report of Government of Pakistan (2019) reported the same findings that due to increased cost the benefits of farmers were compromised. In a study conducted by Raghavan (2008), he found that rise in input costs followed by erratic marketing and inadequate source for livelihoods hindered the cotton productivities. Socio-Economic constraints Socio-economic attributes of the farmers are augmented vital in the process of technological upscaling (Ahmad et al., 2021). Socio-economic conditions of the farmers had significant association with the cotton crop upscaling (Hashmi et al., 2016). They found that the size of the farm was statistically significant with the cotton crop production. In Pakistan, 1.6 million farmers were cotton growers. Whereas, 81% farmers are small landholders bearing average land less than 5.7 hectares (USDA, 2019). Contrary, the large farmers in Pakistan were reported as more influential and had more and easy access to the resources and the modern technology as reported by Kousar et al. (2017). On other hand, the small farmers had limited access to the services and resources they have were limited as well. This is worth mentioning that farmers decisions were associated with the access to resources, extension services (Nyairo et al., 2021), inputs availability, government support and affordability (USDA, 2019). Thus, the small farmers were unable to make decisions much needed to improve the cotton productivity. Non-availability of required information, high prices of inputs like pesticides, soil reclamation materials, organic manures, poor technical knowledge aggravated the constraints and influenced the cotton production Gohil (2016). In another study, Raghavan (2008) rising input costs, sluggish marketing system and lack of sources to support livelihoods were barriers in wake of cotton production. Pertaining to many plights, farmers were ineffective in getting targeted yield of cotton. Financial limitations, exertion in accessing the credit, access to extension advisory services and inadequate