have suggested establishing a national collateral company to “provide and secure the end-to-end trade flow of the physical trade as well as delivery system which will also act as a conduit for canalizing capital flows to Global derivative financial markets including Commodity Markets” in Pakistan (Commodities Risk Management). However, in post-harvest financing, the interests of wheat supply chain actors and the government are different. Given the significant volumes of government wheat procurement in Pakistan, and the higher wheat prices paid to farmers compared with prices on the international markets, farmers have few incentives to collateralize their wheat rather than selling it directly to the government immediately after harvest. For other actors in the wheat supply chain (traders, financing institutions, etc.), a WRS would probably allow higher levels of liquidity for “free market wheat” because the pledged commodities always have clear market prices and warehouse receipt owners usually have the right to claim the collateral before other creditors. For the government, a WRS has the potential to reduce the burden of costly credit from domestic banks by attracting foreign capital. With the current cost of credit for wheat purchases at 16 percent per annum and the storage terms of ten months, the government spends an estimated USD 250 million in annual interest under the existing wheat procurement programme. Assuming that international financing institutions are available and willing to finance local wheat procurement, exchange rate risks and the interest rate could be lowered from their current 16-17 percent to 10-14 percent, decreasing the costs of financing to USD 190 million/year. However, this option will remain hypothetical until appropriate support policies are in place. It would be against the government’s interest to collateralize its wheat, which is needed for physical interventions in the domestic market (e.g. sales to millers) to stabilize prices. It