Open bulkheads (grain held outdoors between prefabricated steel walls and covered with PVC sheeting) Temporary storage facilities Flexible containers (cocoons) (airtight, unsupported rectangular structures made of lightweight ultraviolet-resistant PVC) Silo bags (heavyweight plastic tubes, usually about 8–12 feet [2.4–3.6 m] in diameter and of variable length) Sources: IFC, 2010; author’s estimates. Two types of bulk storage can be considered for Pakistan: permanent storage (concrete and steel silos), and temporary storage (silo bags). These options would serve the needs of different conditions in Pakistan. The main cost elements are provided in Table 20. Table 20: Permanent and bulk storage options and considerations for Pakistan Concrete silo (permanent) Silo bag (temporary) Capacity (tonnes) 50 000 50 000 Cost (USD) 10 million 205 800* Period of use (years) Up to 100 *Including cost of grain loading/offloading machinery as described in Annexes 5 and 6. Sources: IFC, 2010; author’s estimates. Temporary storage considerations The silo bag is a special kind of hermetic bag that creates unfavourable conditions for insect pests and fungus and reduces the activity of the grain inside the bag. The basic principle behind hermetic storage is the elimination of oxygen to a level that suppresses or inactivates the reproductive capacity and/or development of insects and fungus. Temporary storage facilities can be used for safe and cost-effective on-farm storage in production areas and for temporary storage at the flag centres (where the grain is first purchased from farmers). More information on temporary storage facilities is provided in Annexes 5 and 6. Permanent storage considerations Analysis carried out by an IFC technical team in 2010 suggested that in Punjab, a concrete elevator would cost less than a steel elevator. Concrete elevators also protect wheat from radial heat and monsoon rains better than steel ones do. The construction of a steel elevator outside Pakistan