topsoil-resident pathogens. Plant stress induced by poor aeration and prolonged soil saturation can render crops less resistant to insect pest attack such as aphids, armyworm, cutworm and wireworm. Crops decline in vigour, have restricted spring growth (RSG) as evidenced by poor shoot and stunted growth, become discoloured and die. Waterlogging and deoxygenation also results in a series of undesirable chemical and biochemical reduction reactions, the by-products of which are toxic to roots. Plant- available nitrate-nitrogen (NO3 -) is reduced by denitrification to nitrite (NO2 -) and nitrous oxide (N2O), a potent greenhouse gas, and plant-available sulphate-sulphur (SO4 2-) is reduced to sulphide, including hydrogen sulphide (H2S), ferrous sulphide (FeS) and zinc sulphide (ZnS). Iron is reduced to soluble ferrous (Fe2+) ions, and Mn to manganous (Mn2+) ions. Apart from the toxic products produced, the result is a reduction in the amount of plant-available N and S. Anaerobic respiration of micro-organisms also produces carbon dioxide and methane (also greenhouse gases), hydrogen gas, ethanol, acetaldehyde and ethylene, all of which inhibit root growth when accumulated in the soil. Unlike aerobic respiration, anaerobic respiration releases insufficient energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and adenylate energy charge (AEC) for microbial and root/shoot growth. The tolerance of the root system to surface ponding and waterlogging is dependent on a number of factors, including the time of year and the type of crop. Tolerance of waterlogging is also dependent on: soil and air temperatures; soil type; the condition of the soil; fluctuating water tables; and the rate of onset and severity of anaerobiosis (or anoxia), a factor governed by the initial soil oxygen content and oxygen consumption rate. Prolonged surface ponding makes the soil more susceptible to damage under wheel traffic, so reducing vehicle access. As a consequence, waterlogging can delay ground preparation and