profitability in wheat production, the government’s wheat policy aims to balance support to farm incomes with price stability and affordable flour and bread prices for consumers. There has been strong government involvement in the wheat sector since the late 1950s, based on the sector’s importance to the economy and food security. In 1959/60, the government fixed the domestic prices for wheat and other crops at higher than international prices to promote domestic production. During this period, a ban was placed on interprovincial wheat trading by the private sector, to facilitate government procurement of wheat from surplus production areas (Islam and Garrett, 1997). Pakistan has maintained a heavily controlled wheat sector since then. Through the provincial food departments and the Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation (PASSCO), the government procures about one-third of domestic wheat production, which – given the significant on-farm consumption – represents most of the marketable supply from farmers. All imports are handled by TCP. The procurement prices paid to farmers, the wheat sale (release) prices paid by millers and the interprovincial movement of wheat are all controlled at the federal, provincial and district levels. The federal government establishes the procurement price at the beginning of each marketing year, together with targets for wheat procurement by provincial food departments and federal agencies. The government also sets the release price, which can be adjusted later during the marketing year. Provincial governments intervene heavily in the market, especially in the main wheat producing province of Punjab. The wheat stocks held by PASSCO and provincial governments (in Punjab, Sindh and Balochistan) comprise operational reserves, which are sold to millers on an as-needed basis, and strategic holdings, which are managed to support prices; however, there is no clear division between these two types of reserve. As only about one-fifth of households produce