group, 2012 (percentages) Product group MFN applied duties Imports Average Duty-free Max. Duty-free Animal products 14.6 20.9 50.1 Dairy products 30.0 Fruits, vegetables, plants 18.2 12.2 1.8 75.0 Coffee, tea 12.8 0.9 Cereals and preparations 18.8 5.1 0.7 33.4 Source: WTO, 2012. However, as evidenced from the price analysis, wheat imports into Pakistan are not effectively regulated by an import tariff. Instead, they are regulated by the State through State-owned trading and import control. TCP imports essential commodities on a non-profit basis under directives issued by the Economic Coordination Committee of the Cabinet, and exports agricultural goods produced by public sector corporations and agencies. TCP reportedly has no import monopoly or exclusive trading rights, and pays full taxes and tariffs on imports. Its main activity is selling imported urea to fertilizer manufacturers, but it also imports wheat, sugar and, periodically, pulses (lentils for daal), when these commodities are in short supply. These imports are then often sold at regulated/subsidized prices to millers or lower- income households (WTO, 2008). How is wheat procurement organized and what are the main government agencies involved? The agencies listed in Table 7 are tasked with the development and implementation of public support programmes within the Government of Pakistan. Table 7: Main government agencies and mechanisms for wheat procurement in Pakistan, 2008 Government ministry/agency Key areas of responsibility Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock Agricultural policy, fisheries, forestry, sanitary and phytosanitary regulation, quarantine. Agriculture Prices Commission Support prices. TCP Support prices, buffer stocks, State trading. PASSCO Support prices, buffer stocks. Ministry of Commerce Import and export policies, WTO coordination, South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and other regional agreements, investment incentives. Source: Adapted from WTO, 2008. Wheat stocks are procured and maintained by provinces, and by PASSCO on behalf of the federal government. The provincial food