Pakistan have negative impacts on the performance of farmers who have to rely on inflexible and unreliable canal supplies. The yields of farmers with access to their own irrigation from groundwater are reported to be twice as high as those of farmers relying on traditional surface irrigation. According to FAO estimates of attainable yields of irrigated wheat in high-input farming systems, which are based on agro-ecological zones,1 wheat yields in Punjab, the primary production area in Pakistan, could reach 6 tonnes/ha through sustainable crop intensification (Figure 2). Annual wheat production in Pakistan could therefore increase to 32.5 to 38 million tonnes/year – about 30 to 50 percent higher than the 2009 production level – assuming: (i) maintenance of the current wheat area harvested of 9 million ha; and (ii) realization of 60 to 70 percent of the potential wheat yield attainable in Pakistan’s agro-climatic conditions. However, any programme aimed at intensifying wheat production and increasing yields needs to take into account bottlenecks in the wheat supply chain, including the lack of proper grain storage and other issues described in this report. Figure 2: Agro-climatically attainable yields for high-input irrigated wheat in Pakistan, baseline period 1961 to 1990 Source: FAO GAEZ http://www.fao.org/nr/gaez/en/. FAO’s agro-ecological zoning (AEZ) methodology is the primary tool for assessing land resources. It is based on the FAO Framework for Land Evaluation, which has been used since 1978 to assess agricultural production potential and production capacity, actual and potential yields, and yield gaps. Agro-ecological zones are defined as homogeneous and contiguous areas with similar soil, land and climate characteristics. For more information, please refer to http://www.fao.org/nr/gaez/programme/en/. What are Pakistan’s wheat production structure and machinery use levels? As already mentioned, wheat is by far the most important crop in Pakistan. According to the 2010 Agricultural Census of Pakistan2, farms