on finding ways of successfully fumigating farm grain stores. Alternative methods of insect control, such as the admixture of insecticides with grain could not be considered since appropriate formulas are not available in Pakistan. The design of the local metal bin was modified in consultation with PARC's agricultural engineers to assist the manufacturers and farmers to produce a much stronger bin, more suitable for fumigation. The fumigation of small quantities of grain in bags was also tested in villages. The bags are enclosed in a polythene envelope, which is sealed after introducing the phosphine-producing compounds. If the polythene sheet is left in place after treatment, the risk of cross-infestation is significantly reduced. 5. References Baloch, U. K. (1994). Post-Production Systems in Pakistan. Expert Consultation in regional Priorities and Co-operation in Post-Harvest Systems in Asia. FAO/RAPA. Bangkok, Thailand. Baloch, U. K., Irshad, M. and Ahmed, M. (1994). Loss Assessment and Loss Prevention in Wheat Storage - Technology Development and Transfer in Pakistan. Stored Product Protection. International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre (CABI). England, UK. Baloch, U. K. (1992). Integrated Pest Management in Food Grains. FAO/PARC. Islamabad, Pakistan. Baloch, U. K., Irshad, M., Bajoi, A. H., Baloch, G. M., Khalil, S. K. and Quayyum, H. A. (1986). Loss in Public Sector Storage in Pakistan. Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC). Islamabad, Pakistan. Baloch, U. K., Irshad, M. and Iqbal, J. (1984). Post-Harvest Loss Research and Extension Training in Pakistan. A Review. Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC). Islamabad, Baloch, U. K. and Admed, M. (1986). Post-Harvest Research, Management and Technology Transfer System in India. Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC). Islamabad, Baloch, U. K., Naeemullah, M. and Sabri, M. (1986). Survey of Farm-Level Storage Loss in Major Food Grain - Wheat Storage Season 1985-86. FAO/PARC. Islamabad, Pakistan. Baloch, U. K. (1989). Survey of Farm-Level Storage