storage considerations Analysis carried out by an IFC technical team in 2010 suggested that in Punjab, a concrete elevator would cost less than a steel elevator. Concrete elevators also protect wheat from radial heat and monsoon rains better than steel ones do. The construction of a steel elevator outside Pakistan was estimated to cost about 20 percent less than that of a concrete elevator. However, lower labour and cement costs in Pakistan make concrete elevators a better technical option for Pakistan. Nonetheless, large and medium feed millers and oilseed traders have invested in steel silos when working in similar climatic conditions, as confirmed during face-to-face interviews with leading traders in Karachi. It is therefore highly desirable that private sector investors be free to select the elevator types that they feel best suite conditions in Pakistan. Would the public–private partnership concept help in addressing wheat storage issues? PPPs are usually referred to as a “working arrangement based on mutual commitment (over and above that implied in any contract) between/among public sector organization/s and any organization/s outside the public sector” (Bovaird, 2004). Such partnerships can be sectoral in nature, with public sector agencies partnering with the private sector, civil society and/or non-governmental organizations (NGOs); range from loose networks to collaborative, power sharing, consultative or contractual arrangements; be supply side-oriented, demand side-oriented or mixed; and be vertical, horizontal or a combination of both. The establishment of PPPs for agricultural development is a response to financial constraints in the public sector/State (resulting in a “marriage for money”), the management expertise available in the private sector, and other factors (FAO, 2011). PPPs are probably the most acceptable intervention for improving the current state of grain handling and storage in Pakistan. Involvement of the private sector should allow private operators to make rational decisions regarding grain