also low in the tropical belt, which produces less than one percentage of world's wheat. The average wheat yield in developing countries in 1950 was about 700 kg/ha. By 1996 average yield tripled to 2241 kg/ha. This progress stemmed from development of new wheat varieties, which were shorter in stature, high yielding, and earlier to mature. These were supplemented with technologies including methods of sowing, seed rate, irrigation, fertilising, moisture conservation and integrated pest management. Potential yield, particularly in the African and Asian developing countries was not fulfilled as a consequence of inadequate application of improved practices. lack of water, fertilisers, pesticides, improved seeds and socio-economic constraints where the majority of the people below the poverty line are living. 1.1 Economic and Social Impact Improved wheat production enlarged the demand for agricultural labour. In one study in India, it was estimated that an average increase of 23 man-days per hectare per crop season was needed to accommodate extra fertiliser application, irrigation, weed control, and harvest volume. Assuming an increase of only 10-15 man-days of labour for a given wheat crop, 30 million hectares of modern varieties would require from 300-450 million man-days of additional labour per year, a benefit for employment. These operations promote secondary employment in harvest and post-harvest operations including transportation, storage, manufacturing and merchandising of fertilisers, herbicides and farm tools. Multiple cropping was stimulated by early maturing wheat varieties and the use of fertiliser, further expanding employment. There has been rapid evolution in the management practices employed for improved high yielding varieties (HYV). In the Indian and Pakistani Punjab, farmers mostly use nitrogenous and phosphate fertilisers and take advantage of improved water management practices. They apply herbicides to control the grassy weeds that have proliferated. Mechanical land preparation and the use of tractors have also been widely