United Nations General Assembly in 1975. Reports by a FAO Food Security Mission in 1980 and a World Bank Grain Storage Project Mission in 1981 in Pakistan, drew attention to the potential seriousness of farm storage loss, particularly for wheat. It was noted that considerable loss caused by insects, and to a lesser extent by rodents and fungi, occurs when grain is stored for three months or longer. Relatively low levels of insect damage may result in the rejection of a large amount of potential food material at the cleaning/food preparation stage. FAO, therefore, has been instrumental in developing action plans to reduce loss in grain after harvest through loss assessment, technology transfer and development of expertise via information dissemination. 3.1 Wheat loss factors Loss is defined as a measurable decrease of the food quantity and quality. Loss should not be confused with superficial damage generally due to deterioration. Quantitative loss is physical and can be measured in weight or volume, while qualitative loss can only be assessed. Quantitative loss, qualitative loss, nutritional loss, seed viability loss and commercial loss may gauge this reduction. The major biotic factors influencing wheat loss during storage are insects, moulds, birds and rats. The major insect species known to infect wheat include Khapra beetle, Trogoderma granarium Everts; Lesser grain borer, Rhizopertha dominica (F); Rice Weevil, Stitophilus oryzae (L.) and Red flour beetle, Tribolium castaneum (Hbst). All these insects may be found extensively in most developing countries to different extremes. Other insect species are recognised storage pests that also infest stored wheat like Angoumois grain moth, Sitotroga cerealella (Oliv.); Rice moth, Corcyra cephalonica Straint; Saw toothed grain beetle Oryzaephilus surinamensis (L.); Long headed flour beetle Latheticus oryzae Wat.; Flat grain beetle Cryptolestes pusillus (Schoen). Biotic factors including temperature, humidity and type of storage all affect