of water extract of neem leaves can block the penetration of insects into treated bags (paper or cloth) for at least 6 months during storage. 4.2.2 Chemical Pest Control The majority of farmers in developing countries belong to the subsistence group and often cannot afford the costly modern grain protectants. Fumigation with toxic gases is most effective in airtight structures and is only economical if carried out on a commercial scale. Even if properly applied, the fumigated grains are still liable to frequent re-infestation by insect pests. This technology is not yet applicable to the farm level in Pakistan because storage structures are not airtight and located inside or near residential areas where fumigation may be dangerous. The admixture of insecticide dusts with grain can provide protection against insects, but pose a danger from their persistent harmful residues. Breeding of resistant strains of insects cannot be explicitly prevented nor can the high cost of environmental pollution be ignored. Moreover, application of insecticides requires sophisticated techniques and complicated calculations, which farmers cannot easily comprehend. However, there are no traditional methods adopted for pest management, in the public sheds. Local market dealers or agents procure wheat directly or from the government. Wheat is transported using private trucks to the food department sheds, which can be privately hired storage facilities. The storage loss studies and the socio-economic surveys provided the justification for a pilot- scale program of loss reduction. Since insects were the major cause of storage loss, the loss reduction activities focused on finding ways of successfully fumigating farm grain stores. Alternative methods of insect control, such as the admixture of insecticides with grain could not be considered since appropriate formulas are not available in Pakistan. The design of the local metal bin was modified in consultation with PARC's agricultural engineers to