shrunken, broken and insect-damaged kernels: all indicators are assessed via visual inspection and the scheme is believed to have no legal status for possible litigation. It is not effective for bagged wheat, because it is difficult to implement during busy procurement seasons when a few food department employees have to perform all the duties related to procurement, including completion of accounting and other paper work. The FAQ system will likely lose credibility as the wheat market develops and consumers put more emphasis on the quality of bread and other products. The limitations of the system are summarized in Table 17. Using FAQ specifications for wheat exports is not possible because importers have their own specifications and minimum parameters of quality and safety indicators, including test weights, protein content and falling numbers. Table 17: Impacts of the FAQ scheme and the zero loss policy on wheat distribution and consumption in Pakistan At procurement During storage At consumption No objective test of grain quality. Impossible to determine changes in quality during storage. Uncertain milling yields and products. Purchase of wheat with excessive impurities and moisture. Increased risk of grain deterioration. Higher processing costs. Greater opportunity for irregularities. Higher handling and storage costs. Higher consumer prices. Sellers adulterate grain to offset cost of procurement malpractices. Storage managers adjust quality to cover losses. Less food for consumers. Honest sellers and producers not rewarded monetarily. No incentive to purchase good-quality wheat. Poor nutritional food value. Source: Famine Early Warning Systems Network survey responses 2007. EU wheat procurement and Ukraine national wheat standards are provided in Annexes 3 and 4 respectively to demonstrate the kinds of quality parameters monitored. A sample wheat import specification from the United Arab Emirates – one of Pakistan’s trading partners – is provided in Table 18, along with International Organization for