growth conditions for producing high crop yields, especially during the crucial periods of plant development. To achieve this, management practices need to maintain soil conditions that are good for plant growth, particularly aeration, temperature, nutrient and water supply. The soil needs to have a soil structure that promotes an effective root system that can maximise water and nutrient utilisation. Good soil structure also promotes infiltration and movement of water into and through the soil, minimising surface ponding, runoff and soil erosion. Conservation tillage practices, including no-tillage and minimum tillage that incorporate the establishment of temporary cover crops and crop residues on the surface (Plates 32–34), provide soil management systems that conserve the environment, minimise the risk of soil degradation, enhance the resilience and quality of the soil, and reduce production costs. Conservation tillage protects the soil surface reducing water runoff and soil erosion. It improves soil physical characteristics, reduces wheel traffic which lessens wheel traffic compaction, and does not create tillage pans or plough pans. It improves soil trafficability and provides opportunities to optimise sowing time, being less dependent on climatic conditions in spring and autumn. Conservation tillage also encourages soil life and biological activity (including earthworm numbers) and increases micro-organism biodiversity. It retains a greater proportion of soil carbon sequestered from atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) and enables the soil to operate as a sink for CO2. Soil organic matter levels build up as a result and create the potential to gain ‘Carbon Credits’. Conservation tillage also uses smaller amounts of fossil fuels, generates lower greenhouse gas emissions and has a smaller ecological footprint on a region, thereby raising marketplace acceptance of produce. On the other hand, conventional tillage can impact negatively on the environment, with a greater food eco-footprint on a region and a country. It reduces the organic