storage pests that also infest stored wheat like Angoumois grain moth, Sitotroga cerealella (Oliv.); Rice moth, Corcyra cephalonica Straint; Saw toothed grain beetle Oryzaephilus surinamensis (L.); Long headed flour beetle Latheticus oryzae Wat.; Flat grain beetle Cryptolestes pusillus (Schoen). Biotic factors including temperature, humidity and type of storage all affect environmental conditions in storage. High temperature causes deterioration, while low temperature is good for storage. High temperature accelerates the respiration of grain, which produces carbon dioxide, heat and water, conditions favourable for spoilage. Humidity equally impacts grain storage. Increasing humidity increases spoilage, while decreasing humidity is good for storage. The type of storage plays a fundamental role in storage efficiency. If a concrete or mud storage structure can absorb water or allow the water vapours to pass through, in the case of a jute bag, the bio-chemical changes and mould attack are minimal, but the risk of insect infestation increases. Sun drying or turning of food grain has many advantages as it provides an opportunity for inspection and precautionary measures to avoid spoilage. Aeration greatly minimises mould growth, insect activity, and respiration of the seed. Further aeration provides a cooling action and equalises the temperature throughout the mass of the grain stored. Bad odours developed by stored grains can be easily and effectively removed. Climate conditions, grain conditions at storage (presence of infestation, moisture content, foreign matter content), the period of storage, grain and pest control practices all contribute to the rate of loss caused by insects and mould growth. As these factors interact, it is difficult to isolate them or identify one factor, which has a direct influence on loss. Average statistics for loss, whether for store types, areas, or quantities of grain stored are inconclusive. An average figure for loss for a region or a country holds no