contingencies. These investment costs are equivalent to approximately USD 10 million at an average of USD 202/tonne of storage capacity. Estimated operating costs would total PKR 23 million/year (recurrent), or approximately USD 270 000/year, for maintenance, repairs, electricity, payroll and other expenses, as indicated in Table 23. SBP has recently introduced a programme to encourage private businesses to construct grain silos by facilitating commercial bank lending at reduced interest rates of 8 to 12 percent per year, but no information on the implementation of this programme or on its successes was available when this report was being finalized. The current market (undistorted) interest rate of 16 percent was used to derive the discount rate for calculating the economic efficiency of the project. Table 23: Costs of constructing and operating a 50 000-tonne concrete elevator in Pakistan, 2010 Cost item million PKR I. Capital costs: buildings, land, machinery, engineering, software, contingencies II. Total operating costs, million PKR/50 000 tonnes/year including: Operational, administrative, maintenance and personnel 5.80 Electricity 4.4 Fumigation/chemicals Maintenance/repairs 4.25 Insurance 8.2 III. Annual discount rate (cost of capital) % IV. Project duration, years Sources: IFC, 2010 for capital and operating expenses; author’s calculations. Based on the information in Table 23, investment in grain elevators has the potential to generate substantial economic benefits measured by the NPV and IRR shown in Table 24. Table 24: Results of economic analysis of investment in grain elevators in Pakistan, 2010 Indicator Value NPV, million PKR Economic IRR, % per annum 29% Source: Author’s calculations. Thus, investment in grain elevators for wheat storage in Pakistan could result in significant economic returns that exceed the 16 percent discount rate and have significant potential benefits of interest to potential PPPs. Will investments in elevators be financially sustainable? High economic efficiency of investment in grain elevators does