for our country. Therefore, every year variation in the total yield of wheat due to several factors including climate and weather variations directly affects the economy and social balance of the country. Wheat is a Rabi crop that is grown in the winter season. In Pakistan sowing of wheat takes place from October to December and harvests from the month of March to May. In Punjab sowing months of wheat are November and December whereas harvesting period is April and May. Chapter 2 MATERIALS AND METHOD The wheat crop variety Arooj-2022 was cultivated at Regional Agrometeorological Center, Faisalabad in central Punjab during Rabi season 2022-23. Both the meteorological and crop phenological data were recorded during the crop season. In order to compile the data of each development stage, careful, precise and timely recording of the following parameters (table 2.1) were undertaken at 0300, 0900 and 1200 (UTC) as routine practice. 1. Air Temperature (˚C) Maximum & Minimum Temperature (˚C) Soil Temperature (˚C) Relative Humidity (%) Precipitation (mm) Pan Evaporation at 0300 & 1200UTC Bright Sunshine Hours Wind Speed (km/hour) Wind Direction Soil Moisture (%) Crop data including phenological data and soil moisture observation was collected according to World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and Food & Agriculture Organization (FAO) standards. 2.1 Phenology For a sound understanding of plant growth and development, observation and recording of phenological stages of plant is an essential element (table 2.2). The impact of precipitation, heat, drought, diseases, insects, and weeds can be more accurately predicted with a clear picture of the relationship between growth stage and plant response to stress. The optimum timing of fertilizer, irrigation, herbicide, insecticide and fungicide applications are also best determined by crop growth or phenological stage rather than calendar date. [8] Phenological stage Date 1. Full Maturity 2.1.1 Phenological Observations Generally, the