Right to Food by improving access through increased productivity and income generation. Labour conditions were improved through training on safe and efficient agricultural practices, while climate-smart techniques reduced labour inefficiencies. 5. Technological sustainability Technologies introduced were appropriate, context-specific cost-effective. Raised-bed transplanting, irrigation scheduling, earthing up and IPM were suitable for adoption and maintenance by male farmers, with low environmental impact. The project strengthened local knowledge and technical capacity through FFS ToT programmes. Beneficiaries demonstrated moderate capacity to sustain practices independently, with continued support from MALR and ARC likely to enhance long-term outcomes. 6. Economic sustainability Economically, the project facilitated additional financial resources for the sugarcane sector by demonstrating the effectiveness of improved practices, attracting interest from government, donors and development partners. The technologies and practices introduced were affordable and feasible for farmers, although continued technical guidance and access to inputs are needed to ensure sustained adoption. ACHIEVEMENT OF RESULTS - LOGICAL FRAMEWORK Expected Impact Contributed to improving agricultural productivity of Sugarcane and managing natural resources (specifically water, land & fertilizers) through enhancing the technical capacity of Sugarcane smallholder producers in Egypt Outcome Sugarcane productivity of smallholder farmers in upper Egypt enhanced with less irrigation and fertilizers through the adoption of climate-resilient good agriculture practices applying Field Farms Schools (FFSs) and demonstration fields Indicator Percentage of increase of sugarcane yield production. 34 tonnes/feddan. End Target 10 percent yield increase of smallholder sugarcane farmers. and follow-up action to be taken The project demonstrated strong progress towards its intended outcomes, with clear improvements in sugarcane performance resulting from the introduced practices. Key interventions, including transplanted sugarcane on raised beds, timely and uniform earthing up, optimized irrigation scheduling, improved fertilization and strategic intercropping, were implemented and validated across 20 FFS demonstration fields. Field inspections and expert sampling showed that transplanted sugarcane produced seven to