Pakistan Journal of Agricultural Research Research Article Abstract | Sugarcane is a main cash crop of Pakistan grown extensively in varying agro-climatic conditions. It confers a sound economic base to the sugar industry and also supports paper and chipboard manufacturing industry. The rapid human population growth in the country has increased the sugar demand. The present position of low yield and recovery in sugarcane stipulates the breeders to take realistic innovative attempts in varietal development programs to evaluate and release new sugarcane of high cane and sugar yield potential to fulfill the sugar demand in the country. Limited work regarding appraisal of variation in lately evolved sugarcane genotypes for morphological and quality-related characters has been reported in Pakistan. Evaluation of sugarcane genotypes for desired attributes acceptable to growers and sugar mills is necessary before releasing them as commercial varieties. The study was undertaken to evaluate variations in sugarcane genotypes employing four morphological (Cane thickness, cane height, millable stalks, and cane yield) and four quality-related (Brix, pol, purity, and commercial cane sugar percentage) traits. Experiments were conducted in plant crop for two consecutive years 2018-19 and 2019-20 during the autumn cropping season at Makli farm of PARC-National Sugar and Tropical Horticulture Research Institute (NSTHRI), Thatta, Pakistan. A total of four sugarcane genotypes i.e., YtTh-1701, YtTh-1705, YtTh-1707, and YtTh-1730 against standard variety Thatta-10 as check were tested. The genotypes were developed from the exotic fuzz of China. The trials were conducted under RCBD with three replications. The ANOVA exhibited significant (p≤0.05) differences among the genotypes for cane thickness, cane height, number of millable canes, and cane yield, whereas, non-significant (p≥0.05) variations were observed for brix%, pol%, purity% and commercial cane sugar percentage (CCS%). The mean data showed a maximum cane yield of 150.84 t ha-1 for YtTh-1705, followed by YtTh-1707 (145.42 t