the communication gaps. Moreover, it is also realized that the poor generally has no easy access to (micro) finance for investment. Policies working for the promotion of sustainable sugar production are lacking not only at the regional level but also at national and international grounds. The Government The Government and/or the mills should aim to support providers of sugarcane integrated training programmes are desperately needed in the sector. Mills can also persuade practices that benefit themselves and the farmers, for instance the use of mill by-products for soil improvement. Policies measures should also be considered by the Government. The Government needs to strictly implement laws on sucrose-based payments for farmers instead of cane-weight, improved irrigation water allocation, defined water rights for 52 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects- farmers, and the possibility to sell or barter any excess water. Furthermore, charges should be levied for polluting water bodies. Government policies and reforms are required, establishment of sugarcane breeding station on international standards and research stations.53 Farmers suggested that the government should help the farmers form a union so that they have access to a platform where they can raise their problems and they are heard and thought for. In the National Industrial Policy 2011- Implementation framework- the quality compliance is focused. It suggests that tax incentives should be used to encourage private sector to set up quality testing and certification laboratory facilities in all sectors especially those relating to textiles, sugar, leather and pulp and paper sectors. The Civil Society Local and international NGOs can also play an active role by encouraging the dialogue between extension, research centres, innovative farmers, sugar mills and banks for the development of research experiments. Local NGOs can help establish cooperative farming methods and provide platforms to farmer organizations. These organizations can