and organic amendments), green cane harvesting and press mud, a sugar cane mill by-product which is particularly effective for reducing phosphorus deficiency in cane. Mills can provide the farmers of their region the press mud, a phosphorous rich byproduct, for free or at minimal rates as well as provide education on the topics convincing the growers that better management can lead to benefits for the 51 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects- environment, surrounding community as well as the profit margins of the mills and the farmers. Financial returns can be promoted through increased yields, sustained soil health, reduced inputs and enhanced quality of production. Research has shown that countries like Pakistan and India are phosphorus deficient; this biofertilizer can attempt to fulfill this lack in deficiency. The assessment of foliar nutrient levels and adjustment of fertilizer rate is also possible through crop logging, used to monitor plant weight and leaf nutrient content. Efficient use of water resources can lead to higher farm productivity (more crop per drop), benefits for local communities (more drop per person) and the environment (more drop per ecosystem). It will also bring about wider socio- economic development; water will be available for other uses such as fisheries or ecotourism.52 Barriers Expected There will be barriers constraining the implementation of such beneficial practices. The foremost obstacle is the lack of incentives for performance such as realistic charges for water used and reliability of irrigation water delivery. The information blockage presented in terms of the communication gaps. Moreover, it is also realized that the poor generally has no easy access to (micro) finance for investment. Policies working for the promotion of sustainable sugar production are lacking not only at the regional level but also at national and international grounds. The Government The Government and/or