of sulphur dioxide in sugar mills. Moreover the use of hydrogen peroxide also shows higher quality white sugar without any requirement of new equipment. Odour control measures are readily available in the management of sugar beet factory wastes, such as the use of enzymes and organic scavengers for control of H2S. Still more a range of techniques is identified to minister the sugar mill effluents, including the treatment of mill sludge with micro-organisms that accelerate the rate of decomposition.50 III. By-products In addition the production of alcohol from cane also results in noteworthy pollution in the form of the by-product, known as ‘vinasse’. Every litre of alcohol produced from sugarcane produces 13 litres of vinasse. This effluent is discharged into rivers mostly. It is important for mills and the Government of Pakistan to realize the efficient utilities of the by-products. The proper use of by-products can lead to reduction in cost as well as increase in efficiency and sustainability. Governments should incentivize use of by-products as well as spread awareness on the subjects. Some policies can also be enacted on the industrial stage to ensure practices ensuring the sustainable use of resources. NGOs can also aid to promote education on production techniques and the utility of by-products. 49 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects- 50 Sugar and the Environment, WWF report. Available on: http://www.sugarcoconut.com/blogs/21-environmental-effects- Vinasse production from beet molasses can however be utilized in animal feed, as can beet pulp residues, either directly or mixed with molasses and dried. Moreover this vinasse and treated waste water from sugar cane mills is suitable for irrigation. There is however a fear that these products might pollute soils and groundwater and cause salinisation, especially if used in large amounts. Studies presented that irrigation with cane effluent was found to suppress