encouraged and used in many CSR programs to strengthen people’s commitment to development of their country. Some leading businesses of developed nations have established development foundations which work to alleviate and eradicate poverty in the developing regions of the world. Even though it is evident that CSR practices cannot be enforced but governments are working to facilitate the debate and encourage and support initiatives willing to participate in community development programs. CSR in South Asia majorly related to ethical and philanthropic CSR instead of strategic CSR. Strategic CSR centered on brand-associated corporate philanthropy has progressed more rapidly. In South Asia the most common barrier to entrance of CSR practices appears to be the mindset of corporations. A narrow-minded vision targeting short-term profits only seems to be engraved in the region, this may be owe to the lack of awareness and knowledge accompanied by suppressed advice. The businesses in the area believe that CSR is a burden; even large corporations seem to fear discussion on the subject. It is not only seen as a financial burden as many businesses prefer to donate and engage in philanthropic work but hesitate to research and plan a CSR program for social or/and community development. Hence, the progress on adoption of responsible corporate policies is slow, unorganized and largely interrupted. The CSR principles accepted hold more philanthropic characteristics. Businesses are presently participating in projects to support education, healthcare facilities, sanitation and development of rural areas. Still no or minimal initiatives are taken to educate and train communities, to research and begin projects aimed at creating awareness and changing mindsets, behaviors and attitudes of the population. There needs to be a clear distinction between corporate responsibility and corporate philanthropy, and this distinction needs to be communicated in the region. Companies do not believe that CSR introduction