In Pakistan the concept being comparatively fresh is not understood correctly; the approach is mystified with philanthropy. It is clear that adoption of CSR strategies requires changes on all grounds of the organization; from the mechanical procedures to the culture and values. Even in fields where there is awareness of the CSR concept the companies choose to insert simple philanthropy instead of producing intricate CSR models and strategies. It must also be taken into account that in Pakistan there persist no laws or Concept of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) obligations ensuring corporate responsibility or sustainability hence the CSR adopted is purely voluntary by the businesses. The CSR umbrella holds issues in mainly four categories: environment, social, economic and corporate governance. CSR can be imposed on a voluntary basis by the individual company for its quality requirements, for shareholder satisfaction or for consumer contentment. In some cases importing or exporting countries have codes and standards related to corporate responsibility in others NGOs are the driving force behind CSR discussions and awareness strategies. Also some industries have codes of conduct for instance the EUREPGAP, moreover global standards and codes have been developed to ensure CSR practices are being implemented; these include the ISO 14000, SA 8000 or the Global Reporting Initiative guidelines for sustainability. Corporate Governance may be explained as the framework of rules and practices by which a company ensures accountability, fairness and transparency in a company’s relationship with all its stakeholders. Some managers affirmed that “we have corporate governance model and all aspects of this model are properly defined according to the rules and regulation of the industry”, however, the definition of corporate governance was found distorted in the investigations for this study. II. CSR in the Region A manager of a well-know sugar mill criticized boldly that “while the