and prioritizing value-chain Preliminary mapping of the chain Identifying and prioritizing stakeholders Designing research instruments and indicators: Drafting and scheduling interviews with stakeholders Field visits: Conducting interviews of stakeholders Data entering and cleaning Data Analysis CSR dimensions: environment, social, economic and corporate governance Structural analysis Governance and Linkages Paths between sellers and buyers Environmental analysis Resource productivity and environmental performance Developmental analysis Employment and livelihoods Integrating all material Preparing Report: CSR STUDY It is necessary to understand which stakeholders are most influential in the value chain as these stakeholders can be agents of change or agents blocking the change. Stakeholders are all those people who are in one way or more affected by the decisions and operations of the company. Internal stakeholders are those people who are directly impacted for example suppliers, buyers, importers, exporters, producers, employees, producer associations, while external stakeholders may include the policy makers, worker organizations, NGOs and the media. Below Figure1 dictates the sugar industry’s value-chain. Figure 1: Value Chain Linkages in the Sugar Industry Through thorough research it was identified that the milling stage plays a dominant role in the chain. When studied further literature supported that the relationship between the millers and growers was sour and weak. To further investigate the matter, in-depth interviews were conducted to verify the on- ground situation. The analysis took into account the views and experiences of sugar mill managers, farmers, the Competition Commission of Pakistan, Pakistan Sugar Mills Association and the consumers. Questionnaires used for the in-depth interviews are attached in Annexes for view. Growing Harvesting Transport Wholesaler Transport Milling Retailer End-user An Overview I. Production Process After ripening of the sugarcane crop in October-November, the crushing of sugarcane continues till March and April. This period is termed as the crushing season. It can stretch up to a