train communities, to research and begin projects aimed at creating awareness and changing mindsets, behaviors and attitudes of the population. There needs to be a clear distinction between corporate responsibility and corporate philanthropy, and this distinction needs to be communicated in the region. Companies do not believe that CSR introduction in their products will lead to higher returns eventually through better business, new customers and entry into new markets. There are many vital links and components completely missing in the discourse of CSR in South Asia. Understanding CSR as integral part of successful business, uniform definition of CSR, distinction between corporate philanthropy and CSR, focus on ethical CSR practices, making standardized CSR principles available in regional languages to put CSR in local context, comprehensive environment protection policies and focus on long-term sustenance and success of business are some of them. Table 4: Yield per Hectare of Major Agriculture Crops11 11 Economic Survey 2009-10 I. Assumptions This study is based on the simple assumptions that the participants were honest while answering the questions and none of the questions were biased. Also the analysis assumes that the sample was a fair representation of the population targeted. II. Value-chain Analysis For the purpose of this study CSR will be looked upon in terms of corporate governance issues. This research paper attempts to understand the value-chain of the sugar industry, identify its stakeholders and then verify the relationships between them. Below is a flowchart describing all steps of the progress. Methodology Literature Review Identifying and prioritizing value-chain Preliminary mapping of the chain Identifying and prioritizing stakeholders Designing research instruments and indicators: Drafting and scheduling interviews with stakeholders Field visits: Conducting interviews of stakeholders Data entering and cleaning Data Analysis CSR dimensions: environment, social, economic and corporate governance Structural analysis Governance and Linkages Paths between