commercial point of view, ratoon also help sooner initiation of the crushing season from milling perspective as cane maturation and accomplishment of growing degree days (GDD) will be achieved in sooner time when compared with planted cane. Bhatnagar et al., (2003) reported that variation in ratoonablility in sugarcane is genetic in nature. Saeed (1993) found that yield potential of sugarcane ratoon under local conditions of Punjab, Pakistan depended on proper management practices such as timely sowing, execution of optimum interculture and fertilizer as well as irrigation events. Such margin of management for yield improvement is critical to estimation and scheduling of irrigation water based on crop responses at critical stages of cane growth (Geerts and Race, 2009; Mahan et al., 2012). Ratoon production is one way to control an efficient use of inputs i.e. labor, land, water and capital. Hence, higher water use efficiency continues to be an important trait for sugar industry in this part of the globe where soils have fine alluvial texture with variable water holding capacity (Mahesh et al., 2013). Certain physiological processes, i.e., photosynthesis, transpiration, stomatal conductance, biomass portioning and transpiration, are highly affected by soil water availability (Taiz and Zeiger, 2006). Water deficiency stress reduces photosynthesis, resulting in a rapid reduction in growth and developmental traits (Chaves et al., 2009). Sugarcane productivity and sucrose accumulation can be improved by invigorating its physiological and morphological properties (Edmeades et al., 2004; Inman-Bamber et al., 2005). Mineral nutrition is critical for growth and development of cane. Alluvial soils vary in fertility; thus, the utilization of natural and synthetic amendments may help achieve better productivity of cane (Ibrahim et al., 2008). Press-mud, a byproduct of sugarcane crushing, is a useful manure used for increasing soil fertility in Indo-Pak Agronomic responses of sugarcane ratoon crop 73 subcontinent. The application