was the highest under polymer coated SSP and similar in other soil amendment treatments in both growing seasons. The highest cane tops weight was noted at 100% recommended irrigations and the lowest weight was noted at 50% recommended irrigations in 2016-17. Cane tops weight was reduced in the second growing season. The data regarding cane trash weight showed statistically non-significant relationship against all soil applied amendments in different years but the significant response was shown under various irrigation regimes. Highest cane trash weight was recorded in control (100% recommended irrigation) that is statistically at par with 75% recommended irrigation and the lowest trash weight was recorded under 50% recommended irrigation. However, cane trash weight was reduced in 2017-18 season when exposed to both factors (irrigation and soil amendments) Significantly highest harvest index was recorded when plants were subject to polymer coted SSP, while other soil amendments had non-significant effect when studied during 2106-17 and 2017-18. The harvest index values were similar at 100% and 75% Agronomic responses of sugarcane ratoon crop 77 recommended irrigation levels and were higher than the recorded harvest index at 50% recommended irrigation level during both growing seasons. Soil applied fertilizer and different irrigation regimes had no significant effect on brix and pol concentrations in both growing seasons. The highest commercial cane sugar concentration was measured under 100 % recommended irrigations, while the lowest one was measured under 50 % recommended irrigations in both growing seasons. The highest cane sugar concentration was measured in the polymer coated SSP, while the lowest cane sugar concentration was measured under control treatment in both growing seasons. Similar, cane sugar recovery was highest under 100 (%) recommended irrigations and lowest under 50 % recommended irrigations in both growing seasons. Maximum cane sugar recovery was calculated in the polymer coated SSP