TAS 4402- 2010
GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES FOR
 MAIZE
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
ICS 67.020.20 ISBN 978-974-403-744-2


GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES FOR
 MAIZE
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
50 Phaholyothin Road, Ladyao, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900
Telephone (662) 561 2277 Fax (662) 561 3357 www.acfs.go.th
Published in the Royal Gazette Vol.127 Section 147D Special,
Dated 21 December B. E. 2553 (2010)

Technical Committee on the Elaboration of Thai Agricultural Standards on
Good Agricultural Practices for Maize
1. Mr. Chokechai Aekatasanawan
Chairperson
2. Mr. Kawkiat Viriyakitpatana
Member

Department of International Trade
3. Mrs. Pornthip Jeepjong
Member

 Department of Internal Trade
4. Mr. Ronachai Juangphanich
Member

 Department of Livestock Development
5. Mr. Kaival Klakhaene
Member

Department of Agricultural Extension
6. Mr. Pichet Krudloyma
Member

Department of Agriculture
7. Mr. Pisan Pongsapitch
Member

8. Associate Professor Ed Sarobol
Member

Kasetsart University
9. Mr. Siriwut Manakasem
Member

Thai Seed Trade Association
10. Mr. Phakorn Kosonsittivit
Member

The Thai Maize and Produce Traders Association
11. Mrs. Ubon Chamroonrat

Member

Thai Feed Mill Association
12. Mr. Sikhant Pongsapipatana
Member
The Animal Husbandry Association of Thailand
13. Mrs. Charieng Siripool
Member

The Lamtakhong Land Settlement Agricultural Cooperative

14. Mrs. Prisanar Siriacha
Member

Expert

15. Miss Ing-orn Panyakit

 Member and Secretary

Office of Standard Development

Maize is an agricultural commodity of economic importance as a raw material for food and feed industries. It is an agricultural commodity that provides an option for import under the
agreement of ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA). Therefore, for the benefit of Thai farmers, the Agricultural Standards Committee deems it necessary to establish the standard on Good
Agricultural Practices for Maize so as to produce high quality maize.
The standard is based on the following documents:
Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives. B. E. 2547 (2004).
Good Agricultural Practices for Maize.
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, FAO, Rome. 1985. Codex Standard for Maize.
CODEX STAN 153.

NOTIFICATION OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATIVES
SUBJECT: THAI AGRICULTURAL STANDARD:
GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES FOR MAIZE
UNDER THE AGRICULTURAL STANDARDS ACT B. E. 2551 (2008)

Whereas the Agricultural Standards Committee deems it necessary to establish an agricultural standard on Maize in accordance with the Agricultural Standards Act B. E.
2551 (2008) to promote such agricultural commodity to meet its quality, standard and safety.
By virtue of Section 5, Section 15 and Section 16 of the Agricultural
Standards Act B. E. 2551 (2008), the Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives hereby issues this notification on establishment of Thai Agricultural Standard: Good Agricultural Practices
for Maize (TAS 4402-2010),as a voluntary standard, details of which are attached herewith.

Notified on 4 October B. E. 2553 (2010)
(Mr. Theera Wongsamut)
Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives

GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES FOR MAIZE
1 SCOPE
1.1 This Thai Agricultural Standard (TAS) on Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) for Maize
applies to all production steps from cultivating to post-harvest handling at farm level.
1.2 This standard shall be jointly implemented with TAS 4002, Thai Agricultural Standard
for Maize.
2 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this standard:
2.1 Maize (corn) means a grain of Zea mays L., in the Gramineae family, having hard kernels
with high starch content. It is used for food, feed or raw materials for food and feed.
2.2 Unhusked maize (corn) ear means a mature whole ear (full maturity without the removal
of its leafy outer covering).
2.3 Husked maize (corn) ear means an ear as referred to in Section 2.2 with the removal of its
leafy outer covering but un-shelled.
2.4 Maize (corn) kernel means a whole shelled grain excluding seed for planting.
2.5 Damaged ear means an ear that contains the kernels which are germinated, broken,
obviously damaged by fungi, insects and other pests, or the ear with abnormal colour and odour.
2.6 Visual inspection means an inspection of any external physical appearances of an item,
for example produce, product, or apparent environment conditions. This is basically examined by eyes. Any other sensory evaluation may be applied depending on quality factors
in question, and additional tools may be applied such as magnifying lens as necessary.
Subsequently, physical appearances and environmental conditions shall be assessed so as to see if the criteria are fully met. The processes and working procedures are also necessary to
be inspected visually.
2.7 Pesticide means any hazardous substance used in agriculture regulated by the Department
of Agriculture in accordance with the Ministry of Industry notification referred to as types and lists of hazardous substance promulgated under the Hazardous Substance Act B. E. 2535
(1992) and its amendments.
2.8 Hazardous substance means any chemical or other substance including chemical product,
microorganism and toxin excreted by microorganism that may be harmful to human, animal, plant, properties or environment.

2.9 Pest means any living organism such as plant, animal or microorganism that causes
damage to plant.
2.10 Traceability means the ability to trace and track the produce from a specified step or
various steps of production at farm level, processing, and distribution.
3. REQUIREMENTS AND INSPECTION METHODS
Requirements and inspection methods shall be as Table 1.
Table 1 Requirements and inspection methods
 (Section 3)
1. Water source

1. Water shall be from a source that does
not contain residues or contamination of hazardous substances and pesticides to maize kernels at the level that may be harmful to the consumers.
1. Visual inspection of the
environment. If there is any risk, the water quality shall be analysed.
2. Planting area

2. Planting area shall not contain any
residue or contamination of hazardous substances and pesticides to maize kernels at the level that may be harmful to the consumers.
2. Visual inspection of the
environment. If there is any risk, the soil quality or the produce shall be analysed.
3. The use of
pesticides

3.1 Operators
acquire proper knowledge and skill on the use of pesticides.

3.1 Interview the operator on
the knowledge and operation skill or check the training records.

3.2 In case where the use of pesticides is
necessary, follow the recommendations of the Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, or the recommendations on the labels registered
with the Department of Agriculture,
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives.
3.2.1Inspect the pesticide storage area.
3.2.2 Check records of pest
survey pesticide application.
3.2.3 In case where there is
evidence situation to believe that the use pesticides is not adhered to the recommendations, the produce shall be randomly sampled
for residue analysis.
4. Pre-harvest
Quality
Management

4.1 No burning of maize stubbles prior to
soil preparation.

4.1
Visual inspection planting area and interview the worker.

4.2 After planting, proper use of pest
control according to the official recommendations shall be carried out.

4.2 Check records of pest
survey pesticide application, and/or visual inspection and interview.

5.1 Harvest the produce at the maturity
stage based

on the following considerations:
- number of days after planting for at least
110 days (in the rainy season) and 120
days (in the dry season), or according to the varieties, or
- 80% to 90% of maize leaves in the field
are dry and maize kernels are at full maturity,
- take the seed to observe a black layer at
the base of maize kernel, or
- the moisture content of maize kernels
does not exceed 30%.

5.1
Check records harvesting visual inspection.

5.2 Harvesting methods
- By labour, either unhusked maize ears or
husked maize ears shall be harvested according to the requirements referred to in
Section 5.1.
- By mechanical, i.e., a corn snapper, the
maize ears shall be harvested according to the requirements referred to in Section 5.1.
- By mechanical, i.e., a corn picker-sheller
or a combine harvester, when moisture content of maize kernels does not exceed
22%.
5.2 Interview
the operator/worker on the procedures harvesting practices for unhusked maize ears or husked maize ears, and/or randomly check the
produce, and/or check records of harvesting.
5.3 Damaged maize ears shall be culled
off.

5.3
Interview the operator/worker on the procedures harvesting practices for unhusked maize ears or husked maize ears, and/or randomly check the
produce.
5. Harvest and
Post-harvest
Handlings

5.4
Maize drying be done immediately after harvest as follows:
- unhusked maize ears and husked maize
ears, the moisture content shall be reduced to not more than 23% within 7 days.
5.4 Inspect

procedures, drying practices, operating area, records operation, and/or interview.

- maize
kernels be distributed immediately within 24 hours. If the distribution can not be done on time, the moisture content shall be reduced to not
exceed 18% within 2 days and stored not more than 3 days.

6.1.1 Storage area shall be well-ventilated,
dry, free from insects and disease carrying animals, and not be located near the pesticide storage area.

6.1.1 Visual
inspection storage area storage practices, and interview.

6.1.2 The recommended moisture content
and storage period are specified in Table 1.
The quality of maize kernels shall be in compliance with the requirements of Thai
Agricultural Standard for Maize (TAS
4002).
6.1.2 Check moisture content
maize kernels, the storage temperature, and/or interview.

6. Storage and
Transportation
6.1 Storage

6.1.3 Maize ears shall not be piled up to a
height of more than 1 m.
6.1.3 Visual inspection of storage
area.

6.2.1 Vehicles for transportation shall be
clean and free from hazardous substances.

6.2.1 Visual
inspection vehicles and/or interview.
6.2 Transportation

6.2.2 Preventive measures shall be in place
to avoid the increase of moisture content of maize during transportation.
6.2.2 Visual
inspection vehicles preventive measures, and/or interview.
7. Personal health

7. Provide appropriate health care and
preventive measures to workers.
7. Visual inspection, and/or
interview, and check the preventive measures.

8.1 Availability of records for inspection
and traceability as follows:
- sources of production inputs
- the use of pesticides
- cultivating and harvesting
- buyers or distributors of each crop of
production

8.1 Check records.

8. Record Keeping

8.2 Records shall be kept for at least 2
years.
8.2 Check records.

Table 1 Moisture content of maize kernels and safe storage period
(Section 6.1.2)
Type of Maize
Average
Moisture
Content (%)
Storage Period

Unhusked maize ears not exceed 23 not over 30 days

not exceed 20 not over 45 days

not exceed 18 not over 60 days

not exceed 15 not over 90 days
Husked maize ears not exceed 23 not over 15 days

not exceed 20 not over 30 days

not exceed 18 not over 45 days

not exceed 15 not over 60 days
Maize kernels not exceed 18 not over 3 days

not exceed 15 not over 5 days

not exceed 13 not over 30 days

4. GUIDANCE FOR GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES FOR MAIZE
Recommendations on Good Agricultural Practices for maize are aimed to be used as a guideline for producing maize of high quality, safe and suitable for food, feed, and raw
materials for food and feed. The details are explained in Appendix A.

APPENDIX A
GUIDANCE ON GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES FOR MAIZE
A.1 WATER SOURCE
A.1.1 Water used in the production process shall be from a source that does not contain residues or contamination of hazardous substances and pesticides to maize kernels. The water
quality shall be suitable for agricultural purpose. In case where there is any suspect of contamination from hazardous substances in the water, clear evidence shall be provided to
clarify that the water can be used for its purpose.
A.1.2 At least one sample should be collected and sent to an accredited laboratory for contamination analysis either at an early stage of setting up the agricultural system and during
a period that the environmental condition is risky for production. The laboratory report shall be kept as evidence.
A.2 PLANTING AREA
A.2.1 The planting area shall not contain any residue or contamination of hazardous substances and pesticides. In case the planting area is located near or in the vicinity of
industry, or in any risky area, the soil quality should be analysed at least once at an early stage of setting up the agricultural system. Soil samples should be collected and sent toan
accredited laboratory. The laboratory report shall be kept as evidence.
A.2.2 Plot identification codes and records should be set up to indicate name of the owner, name of the responsible person (optional), contact address, location, species and varieties,
history of land use at least in the past 2 years, and other relevant details.
A.2.3 Land use for planting should be subject to the provision of relevant laws and regulations.
A.2.4 In case of new planting area, the land should not cause any negative impact to the environment. If there is any risk of impact, preventive measures and corrective actions should
be conducted to minimize further damage.
A.3 THE USE OF PESTICIDES
A.3.1 The use of pesticides shall be complied with the recommendations of the Department of Agriculture, or the recommendations on the labels registered with the Department of
Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives. Besides, the pesticide application corresponding to the detected pest shall be carried out.
A.3.2 Use only the pesticides that are legally registered with registration numbers and prescribed labels for maize. Do not use pesticides that are banned from production, import,
export, or in possession according to the Hazardous Substance Act B. E. 2535 (1992) and its amendments and those indicated in prohibited lists of trading countries or trading
requirements. In any case, the pesticides prohibited in Thailand shall not be used. The use of pesticides shall be withheld prior to harvesting stage as indicated on the labels or in
compliance with the official recommendations.

A.3.3 Read recommendations on the labels in order to understand properties of the pesticides and their application methods before use.
 A.3.4 A pesticide operator/supervisor shall acquire the proper knowledge and the skill of particular pests, selection and application rate of pesticides, selection of chemical sprayers
and their nozzle equipment including spraying methods. The sprayers shall be checked and maintained in a functional condition at all time for an effective use. The pesticide operator
should have the personal protective equipment (PPE) such as mask or nose covering cloth, gloves, cap and boots in order to prevent danger from such pesticide. The use of pesticide
mixture for more than two types shall be avoided unless it is complied with technical recommendations.
A.3.5 Pesticides shall be prepared in accordance with the recommendations. The solution shall be mixed well to make it homogeneous before spraying. It is recommended that
spraying of pesticides should be done in the morning or in the evening when the wind is calm and avoid strong sunlight or strong wind. The pesticide operator shall be at windward
position during spraying at all times and should prevent the chemical mist to the nearby plot and the surrounding area.
A.3.6 A sufficient amount of pesticide shall be prepared and completely used at once. No leftover of pesticide should be in the spraying tank.
A.3.7 When the pesticide container is empty, it shall be rinsed 3 times with water. The rinsed water shall be discarded into the spraying tank so that it can be used for further spraying in
the plot where an application of specific pesticide is approved in accordance with the recommendation prescribed on its label or in designated area. In addition, it shall be ensured
that there is no risk of contamination from water source to the produce. The empty pesticide container shall be eliminated to prevent its reuse. It is then dumped into an area particularly
provided for a container of that kind, or buried in the ground deep enough to prevent it from animal digging, and at least 50 m away from water sources and residential area. Burning of
pesticide containers is strictly prohibited.
A.3.8 Immediately after pesticide application, the operator shall take a bath, hair shampoo and change clothes. All clothes worn during spraying of pesticides shall be well laundered
and separated from routine laundry.
A.3.9 When there is the pesticide remaining in the container, its container lid shall be tightly closed and stored in the pesticide storage area.
A.3.10 All pesticides shall be stored in a secure location with good ventilation, away from children and pets, and rain and sunlight proof.
A.3.11 All pesticides and other chemicals e.g. fuel shall be stored separately in the proper storage area in order to prevent their contamination on the produce and environment. Once
the container of pesticide has been opened, its content shall not be transferred out of the original container.
A.3.12 Pesticides shall be kept with clear indication and stored separately from fertilizers, plant growth regulators, various plant supplementary nutrients and PPE.

A.3.13 Provide First Aid and tools for accidental prevention such as eyewash, clean water, sand or fire extinguisher in the pesticide storage area.
A.3.14 Plant protection measures shall be appropriate for pest control and based on pest monitoring and survey.
A.3.15 An appropriate integrated pest management shall be applied to reduce the use of pesticides. Integrated Pest Management (IPM) means a pest control management system
that combines the details of pest population changes and their interaction with the environment as well as integration of appropriate techniques and methods for the reduction of
pest population to below the economic threshold level.
A.3.16 Avoid the repeated use of the same pesticides to delay the development of pesticide resistance in pests.
A.3.17 Workers and pesticide operators should acquire general knowledge and skill in preventing themselves from the hazards of chemical application, as well as First Aid
provision.
A.3.18 Safety instructions for an accident or emergency shall be visibly seen in the chemical storage area.
A.4 PRE-HARVEST QUALITY MANAGEMENT
A.4.1 Seeds shall be in good quality, selected from reliable sources and shall conform to the characteristics of the variety. The germination shall not be less than 95%. The size of seeds
shall be homogeneous with impurities not more than 0.5%. The seeds shall be contained in closed and good packages, either in bag or in box. There shall be a clear label indicating date
of production, name and address of manufacturer. The seeds shall be treated with chemicals to prevent them from diseases and insects, and without traces of fungal and insect damages.
A.4.2 Burning of maize stubbles prior to soil preparation is prohibited since it would lead to the loss of soil nutrients. The stubble of maize should be left for natural degradation or
ploughed under the soil surface during soil preparation as the stubble could help improve soil physical property by softening the soil structure.
A.4.3 Appropriate pest control shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant official recommendations. Plant protection measures shall be effective for pest control and based on
pest survey and monitoring. In addition, appropriate Integrated Pest Management shall be carried out in order to minimize the use of pesticides. Farmers should acquire knowledge on
the species and life cycles of important pests that cause damages to the produce as well as control methods. In case there is an outbreak of pest, plant debris shall be destroyed (e.g.
burning) outside the plot.
A.4.4 Use organic fertilizers from complete decomposition or other processes in order to increase the amount of organic matter in soil and reduce the amount of plant pathogenic
microorganisms.
A.4.5 Use only chemical fertilizers registered with the Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives. Choose the fertilizer formula based on the soil analysis.

A.4.6 Planting area shall not be located on land with its slope more than 10% because ploughing in such area would result in increasing soil erosion. If necessary, a specific pattern,
i.e., contour planting, planting in a zig-zag pattern, contour furrow cultivation and alley cropping with the hedgerows of legume, or terracing is recommended.
A.4.7 Cover crops such as mungbean, sesbania, sunnhemp or jackbean shall be grown to improve soil properties and ploughed when the cover crops have been grown for
approximately 50 days or when they start flowering.
A.4.8 Chemical fertilizers should be combined with organic fertilizers because the organic fertilizers could help improve soil physical and biological properties, increase the amount of
soil microorganisms, enrich with trace elements more than chemical fertilizers, and enhance the nutrient absorption, which would reduce the nutrient loss of chemical fertilizer
application.
A.4.9 To eliminate surplus and waste, infected plant parts shall be burned outside the plot, whereas non-infected plant parts can be used for compost or green manure.
A.4.10 Maize planting during early rainy season should be avoided because there might be a dry spell that could induce a drought stress in maize. Moreover, harvesting during the rainy
season is risky to be infected by Aspergillus flavus, Penicillium spp. and Fusarium spp.
A.5 HARVEST AND POST-HARVEST HANDLINGS1
A.5.1 Appropriate harvesting stage
A.5.1.1 Maize shall be harvested after planting for at least 110 days in the rainy season and
120 days in the dry season, or at harvesting stage suitable for the variety. In addition, the
appropriate harvesting stage could be considered when 80% to 90% of maize leaves in the plot are dry, or when maize kernels are at full maturity.
A.5.1.2 The harvesting stage can be observed from the forming of black layer at the base of maize kernel which appears as a tiny black spot indicating that the maize reaches
physiological maturity and the accumulation of total dry matters in maize kernels is stopped, which the dry weight becomes maximum in this period.
A.5.1.3 In case of harvesting at the required moisture content, a measurement tool should be used to ensure the accurate moisture content.
A.5.1.4 The appropriate moisture content required for harvesting shall not exceed 30%.
However, harvesting when the moisture content is less than 25% would result in maize kernels of quality with less damage from threshing and lower risk from aflatoxin contamination.

1 Source of data from the collaborative project between the National Bureau of Agricultural
Commodity and Food Standards (ACFS) and the Kasetsart University on “A review and analysis of factor, quality and safety of Maize” in order to set up the Thai Agricultural
Standard for Maize.

A.5.2 Harvesting method
A.5.2.1 Labour harvesting is the most convenient and popular method. Maize ears can be removed from the plants by hand with or without husking. Husked maize ears shall be
harvested by using a wooden stick with sharp end to pierce and carefully cut the ear’s tip and try not to damage the kernels so that the husk can be removed from the ear. Afterwards, the
husked maize ears are put into the basket or piled up on the ground or floor with supporting material, and not piled up directly on the damp ground. The husked maize ears shall not be
thrown in order to prevent damage or cracking of the kernels since the damaged kernels will subsequently enhance fungal damage. On the other hand, the unhusked maize ears shall be
harvested and stored. This harvesting method can be done quickly and help prevent the kernels from damage or cracking during harvest and transportation. When harvesting with the
moisture content of kernels, not exceeding 30%, the husks can help prevent the kernels from fungal and insect damages.
A.5.2.2 When harvesting by a corn snapper, the moisture content of kernels shall not exceed
30%.
A.5.2.3 When harvesting by a corn picker-sheller or a combine harvester, maize ears and kernels may be damaged, which is subsequently prone to fungal damage. Therefore, this
harvesting method should be carried out when the moisture content of kernels does not exceed 22%.
A.5.3 Culling of damaged maize ears
Damaged ears, i.e., maize ears that contain kernels which are germinated, damaged by fungi, insects and other pests, or maize ears with abnormal colour and odour shall be culled from
good-quality maize ears as much as possible during harvest in order to reduce the damage of the produce. This practice can result in maize with good or best quality for sale.
A.5.4 Drying
A.5.4.1 Maize drying is an important step that has to be done immediately after harvest in order to minimize contamination of aflatoxin. Drying methods should be carried out either by
sun drying for 2 to 3 days or by wind drying for 5 to 7 days on the clean and dry concrete floor, or on the tarpaulin or plastic sheet, or on the stretcher raised from the ground of at least
half a metre in order to reduce the moisture content of maize ears below 23%.
A.5.4.2 In case of maize kernels, they shall be distributed immediately within 24 hours. If the distribution can not be done on time, the moisture content shall be reduced to 18% within 2
days and stored not more than 3 days. If the longer period of storage is required, the storage shall be carried out in accordance with Section A.6.
A.5.4.3 In case of early harvest of maize which is planted during early rainy season, wet maize ears shall be shelled immediately after harvest. If the moisture content of maize kernels
exceeds 30%, the produce shall be distributed within 24 hours.
A.6 STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION
A.6.1 Storage
A.6.1.1 Storage area shall be well-ventilated, dry, free from insects and disease carrier animals, and not be located near the storage areas of pesticides, fertilizers, and other
hazardous substances.

A.6.1.2 In case where unhusked maize ears are stored for less than one month, the required initial moisture content shall not exceed 23%. This practice would result in reducing the
transmission of diseases and insect infestation, and also inhibit the formation of aflatoxins for
3-6 weeks depending on the level of mold growth.
A.6.1.3 The height of the pile of maize ears shall not be more than 1 m. There shall be air ducts under the pile, or the pile shall be gradually turned over to reduce heat accumulation.
A.6.1.4 Maize storage area shall have supporting material over the floor in order to prevent the produce from direct contact with the floor because maize will absorb the moisture from
the floor, which consequently causes mold growth.
A.6.1.5 Maize ears shall be packed in containers like gunny bag. The bags shall be stacked up with adequate space between stacks, walls and ceilings. This practice will provide good
ventilation and prevent maize from heat and humidity accumulation which is the factor promoting mold growth and insect infestation.
A.6.1.6 The packaging materials for maize ears or maize kernels e.g. gunny bag shall be clean and hygienic in order to be able to prevent contamination from hazardous substances
and dangerous foreign matters including disease carrier animals such as rats, birds, insects or any other animals.
A.6.1.7 Average relative humidity and temperature for maize storage during the dry season shall be 65% and 25-30 °C, respectively.
A.6.2 Transportation
A.6.2.1 Vehicles for transporting maize shall be clean, tightly closed to prevent the produce from rain and contamination of hazardous substances.
A.6.2.2 During transportation, maize ears and kernels shall be packed in a moisture-proof container to prevent an increase of moisture and the consequential formation of mold.
A.7 PERSONAL HEALTH
Provide appropriate health care and preventive measures to workers such as taking them to the hospital when sick or injured, or providing them with First-Aid kits.
A.8 RECORD KEEPING
A.8.1 Availability of records for inspection and traceability as follows:
(1) Sources of production inputs such as seeds, fertilizers and pesticides;
(2) The use of pesticides;
(3) Cultivating and harvesting;
(4) Buyers or distributors of each crop of production
A.8.2 Records shall be kept for at least 2 years in order to trace back and recall the produce when there is food incident. For traceability purpose, the inspection shall be carried out in
accordance with the Thai Agricultural Standard on Principle for Traceability as a Tool within an Agricultural Commodity and Food Inspection and Certification System (TAS 9028-2008).

APPENDIX B
EXAMPLE OF RECORD FORM
General information, Planting, Harvesting and Storage Practices of Maize
Year…………………………………
1. Owner
First Name (Mr./Mrs./Miss)
Family name

Farmer registered No. or plot No.

Identification No.

Contact address: No.
 Moo.
 Road
Sub-istrict

District
 Province

 Postal Code

Telephone No.
 Mobile phone No.

2. Planting area
2.1 Plot location (If it is different from the contact address of owner)

Total plots
 Total area rai

2.2 Soil types
□ Clay
□ Clay loam □ Sandy loam

□ Sandy
□ Others (Specify)

2.3 Water used on farm □ Rain water □ Ground water □ Natural water source

Map of plot location, communication route and significant places in the vicinity for travel convenience

N

3. Land use history Plot No.

3.1
□ Used to be an agricultural land
 Year

□ Idle land
□ Used to be an industrial land
Year

□ Used to be a dumping site of refuse/waste water/waste chemicals

Year

□ Used to be a hospital
Years

□ Others (Please specify)

3.2 Planting species in the past 1 year Name

Planting species in the past 2 years Name

3.3 Analysis of pesticide residues (the result of analysis shall be attached to this form)

3.3.1 Water
□ Yes □ No
Date of sampling
Date of delivering for analysis

□ Non-detected residues □ Detected residues (Specify).
3.3.2 Soil
□ Yes □ No
Date of sampling.
 Date of delivering for analysis

□ Non-detected residues □ Detected residues (Specify)

3.3.3 Crops (Specify)
□ Yes □ No
Date of sampling.
 Date of delivering for analysis

□ Non-detected residues □ Detected residues (Specify)

4. Current cultivating practices (Planting/Harvesting/Handling/and Distribution)
4.1 □ Burn stubbles before planting □ Not burn stubbles before planting
4.2 □ Grow cover crops Name
 Date of planting.

□ Not grow any cover crop
4.3 Use of fertilizers

□ Compost
□ Manure
□ Others (specify)

□ Not use any fertilizer

4.4 Production inputs

4.4.1 Seeds
Name/Commercial name
Source
(Producer/Distributor)
Manufacturing date
Expiry date

4.4.2 Fertilizers/Applied Formulas
Name/Commercial name
Source
(Producer/Distributor)
Manufacturing date
Expiry date

4.4.3 Pesticides
Name/Commercial name
Source
(Producer/Distributor)
Manufacturing date
Expiry date

Pest survey
Pest Control
Plot No.
Date
Weeds/Diseases/Insects
Pesticide names (Commercial names)/Other control measures
Date of application
Amount
 (kg)

Fertilizer application
Plot No.
Planted area
(rai)

Harvested area
(rai)

Seeds used
(kg)

Date of planting

Date of application
Amount
(kg)
Date of harvesting
Production
Date of distribution

4.5 Planting and harvesting
4.6 Pest Control

4.7 Produce
4.7.1 Culling of damaged maize ears
□ No culling
□ Yes, in which stage:
□ Harvesting □ Storage □ Distribution
4.7.2 Storage
□ With husks □ Without husks □ Kernels

Storage method □ Bulk

□ Container

□ Gunny bag □ New

□ Reuse (previously contained.
)

□ Plastic bag □ New

□ Reuse (previously contained
)

□ Others (specify).

Storage area

□ Storage house □ Barn □ living area (dry in living area)
4.7.3 Moisture content of the produce
Duration
Date of measurement
Moisture content (%)
After harvest

During storage

Distribution

4.7.4 Produce Distribution (in the previous planting season)
□ Immediately after harvest □ day after harvest
□ Sun drying for days prior to distribution

 During the drying process, there was
□ rain... day(s)

□ no rain
□ Oven drying at degree Celsius prior to distribution
□ Other drying methods (specify)

Produce

Amount
(Kg)
Selling price per kg
(Baht)
Name and address of buyer

Unhusked maize ears

Husked maize ears

Maize kernels

4.7.5 Surplus and waste management
□ Burried at

□ Other methods (Specify)

5. Training of worker/responsible person
5.1 Training

□ Yes □ No

Title/program of training
Organization
Date/Month/Year

□ Graduated in Agriculture major

5.2 Experience
□ Have some experience in maize cultivation for years

Signature of responsible person

APPENDIX C
MAIZE PESTS

severe in the rainy season

Sorghum Downy mildew
Causual organism: Peronosclerospora sorghi
(W. Weston & Uppal) C. G. Shaw
-The symptom starts with irregular yellow, light green or dark green stripes on maize leaves, and then it turns the whole leaf into brown colour
causing leaf blight. The leaf becomes wilt and dies eventually.
In the morning, a white fungal mycelium can be clearly observed on the lower leaf surface.
-The infected plant has stunted growth, short internodes, narrow leaves, and malformed reproductive organs (tassels and ears), for
example, elongated ears are barren or have poor seed set, inflorescences or tassels may exhibit bushy growth.
planting areas. Fungal spores spread from the infected plants by wind, rain and infected seeds.
- Use resistant varieties.
- Regularly conduct the
field survey from the beginning of maize planting. If a maize plant exhibits the symptom of disease, the infected plant shall be pulled out and
burnt immediately.
- Grow the maize plants
before heavy rainfall or early rainy season.
- Destroy alternate hosts
e.g. cleaver, sedge, reed,
Saccharum grass, thatch grass including the leftovers of maize plants and germinated kernels from previous harvest.

Late rainy season when the relative humidity is high
 Southern Rust
Causal organism: Puccinia polysora Underw.
- The symptom is shown by reddish brown
pustules on leaf surface. The powdery orange lesions contained in the pustule resemble rust in appearance. Severely infected leaf becomes
chlorotic and dry eventually. If the fungus infection occurs at the flowering stage of male plants, the maize yield will decrease 30% to 70%.
The disease outbreak is generally found in the
North, Northeast, and Central regions of
Thailand. Fungal spores spread by wind.
- If the severe epidemic is

Hot weather and high humidity condition.
Southern Corn Leaf Blight
Causal organism: Bipolaris maydis (Nisikado)
Shoemaker
The symptom is shown by square lesions with reddish brown borders along the length of infected plant debris and alternate hosts. Keep the
plots clean and free from weeds.

maize leaf. The lesions will make the leaf sheath dry at infected areas. When the infection is severe, these lesions coalesce
causing leaf blight.
The fungus also attacks the plants during flowering and kernel formation stages resulting in the negative effect on maize yield and quality.
The fungus produce spores on lesions. Spore dispersal is carried out by wind, rain and seed.
- If the severe epidemic is

Northern Corn Leaf Blight
Causal organism: Exserohilum turcicum (Pass.)
K. J. Leonard and E. G. Suggs
The symptom is shown by large grey or brown lesions along the length of maize leaf, leaf sheath, stalk and husk. The lesion has a
fusiform shape at the size of 2.5 to 20 cm in length. The lesions that appear on leaf can be both single and coalescent causing dried leaf
and dead.
Favorable environmental conditions for disease development are at high humidity and cold weather at temperature range between 18-
27 ºC.
If the fungus attacks the plants before the silk emerges, the maize yield will be decreased
50%. However, if the infection occurs after the silk has emerged for 6 weeks, there will be less impact on yield..
The fungus produce spores on old lesions.
Spore dispersal is carried out by wind and rain.
infected plant debris and alternate hosts. Keep the plots clean.
- If the severe epidemic is

Common Smut
Causal organism: Ustilago maydis (DC.)
Corda
The causal fungus forms tumor-like galls which will turn into black colour when they are mature. Mature black spores are released
from the gall by rupturing its periderm and consequently cause an epidemic for the next growing season. The formation of galls is
found above the ground parts of plants, i.e.,
- Burn and destroy all of
the infected plant debris.
- Treat the seeds with
fungicides before planting
- Use crop rotations by
planting a dissimilar crop instead of maize for 1 to 2 years in the same planting plot where the infection occurred.
- If the severe epidemic is

stalks, leaves, ears, and tassels.
The disease outbreak is found in Northern region of Thailand. Mature black spores that are released from the galls spread by wind,
rain, running water, insects, animals, including seeds.
Hot weather with high relative humidity
(90% to 100%)

Banded Leaf and Sheath Blight
Causal organism: Rhizoctonia solani KÜhn.f.
sp. sasakii Exner.
The causal fungus lives in soil and dead alternate host plants inside the plot. If an infection occurs during seedling stage, the
seedling will become rotten. In natural condition, an infection is found on the lower leaves near soil surface. The symptom is
shown by water-soaked lesions varying in size on the basal part to the middle part of the maize leaf. The lesions will turn pale or straw
colour and spread along the leaf causing dried leaf that looks like sunburn. The symptom also appears with brown concentric bands and rings
on the leaf area.
Lesions on the sheath and leaf are similar, while lesions on the stalk appear under the infected sheath and display in dark brown or
black colours. When the lesions subside or dry, they leave dark brown scales on which the white compact mycelia develop and turn into
dark brown sclerotia.
planting areas.

- Use the seeds produced
from robust and disease- free plants.
- If the severe epidemic is
found, the infected plant shall be pulled out and burnt.
- Avoid the intensive
planting and reduce the application of nitrogen fertilizers.
- Increase the quantities
of organic matters and antagonistic microorganisms in the plot.
- Destroy the maize plants
that are left over from harvest and plough the soil for proper drainage.

Year round
Maize Dwarf Mosaic
Causal organism: Maize dwarf mosaic virus
(MDMV) or Sugarcane Mosaic Virus (SCMV), and Maize Chlorotic Mottle Virus (MCMV)
Vector: Rhopalosiphum maidis (Corn leaf aphid)
- The symptom starts with the chlorotic spots
on the base of young leaflet. These spots later develop short chlorotic streaks parallel to the veins.
- The infected leaf develops a distinct mosaic
having the mottled area of pale green and dark green colours, and yellow spots.
- If the infection occurs during seedling stage,
there may be severe stunting of the plant. As plants approaching maturity, the foliage can turn purple or reddish purple.
- The combination of MDMV and MCMV
infections is characterized by mosaic appearance, leaf blight, and bud necrosis.
- Tassels become malformed or barren. Ears are
nubbin with poor seed set or no ear at all. Husks are dry.
The disease outbreak is found in all planting areas. The virus can be transmitted through farming equipment.
infected plants as well as alternate hosts which are the source of infection such as sugarcane or sorghum that show any symptom of disease.
- Destroy aphids
- Use crop rotations

High humidity condition
 Stalk Rots
Causal organisms: Fungi (e.g. Fusarium moniliforme Sheld., Macrophomina phaseoli
(Maubl.) Ashby, Diplodia maydis (Berk.)
Sacc.) and Bacteria (e.g. Erwinia chrysanthemi pv. zeae)
Symptom
- An infection of this disease starts from the
root system from which stalk rotting organisms spread to the internode. The infected internode tissues become discoloured. The plant is prone
to lodging.
 - This disease frequently occurs in the stages of
mature stalk to flowering stage.
Outbreak infected plant debris.
- Do not overuse nitrogen
fertilizers.
- Avoid the intensive
planting.
- Use organic fertilizers
for soil fertility improvement.

planting areas. The spores will spread through wind and rain.
Rainy season high relative humidity condition
Ear and Kernel Rots
Causal organism: Diplodia maydis, Fusarium moniliforme, Nigrospora oryzae, Penicillium oxalicum,
Botryodiplodia theobromae,
Rhizoctonia solani and Aspergillus spp.
This disease is prone to occur in maize plants that are infected with stem rot disease. The causal fungi damage ears and kernels.
Rotten ears, rotten kernels varying in colours such as white, yellow, pink or black depending on the causal fungi
This disease develops by means of improper storage and harvesting practices that are carried out either in raining and high relative
humidity conditions or when maize is still immature and contains high moisture content.
The disease outbreak is found in all planting areas. The spores will spread through wind, rain, insect and animals.
- Do not leave maize
plants standing in the field after maturity for a long period of time.
- Completely dry the
maize ears before shelling.
- Separate the maize ears
that are damaged by disease.
- Decrease the moisture
content in maize kernels below 15% before storage.
severe in dry weather and dry spell.
 Corn Thrips
Scientific name: Frankliniclla williamsi Hood,
Caliothrips sp. and Thrips hawaiiensis (Morgan)
Adult thrips are black with two pairs of wings.
They are often found in leaf-sheath axils and inflorescences, suckling the sap from them.
The infested leaf shows the pale yellow mottling and later becomes wilt and dies eventually.
The outbreak occurs in every stage of maize planting.
- Inspection of young leaf
bases, leaf-sheath axils, and inflorescences. If the severe infestation is found and the pesticide application is required, follow the
instructions on the labels or the recommendations of the Department of

severe in dry weather and dry spell.
Corn Leaf Aphids
Scientific name:
Rhopalosiphum maidis
(Fitch)
Aphid larvae and adults feed by sucking sap from leaves, plumules, and tassels, causing curly leaf.
If the infestation is severe, the tassels will become wilt and weak, and will not develop to flowering stage. Prior to severe infestation of
Corn Leaf Aphids, the numbers of ants feeding
- Normally, the
population of corn leaf aphids is naturally controlled by several parasitic insects e.g. six- spotted ladybird beetles, ladybeetles, and earwigs.
If the infestation of Corn
Leaf Aphids is found during tassel development, appropriate

on sweet excretion from aphids are often observed as well as the formation of black sooty mold on the infested plants. Aphids
cause the most damage when they attack during the tassel formation stage.
The insect outbreak is found in all planting areas.

control measures shall be carried out.
If the severe infestation is
Asian Corn Borer
Scientific name: Ostrinia furnacalis (Guenee)
Adults are moths with a wingspan of approximately 3 cm. Anterior pair wings are copper colour with transverse wavy lines at the
edges and the bases. Two tiny black spots are at the middle of each anterior wing.
Posterior pair wings have lighter colour than anterior pair wings and almost have no spot or pattern.
Eggs are deposited in clusters overlap like fish scales. Larvae have creamy pink bodies with spots on each body segment. Mature larvae are
approximately 20 mm long.
Larvae begin boring into the top leaves, tassels, and stalk, and destroy in every stage of the plant growth. Asian corn borers cause the
most damage when they attack during the tassel formation stage.
The insect outbreak is found in all planting areas.
- Normally, the
population of Asian Corn
Borer is controlled by natural enemies such as
Trichogramma spp. and earwigs which will feed eggs and larvae of Asian
Corn Borer and result in the prevention of an outbreak. Yet, antlions and spiders also feed the young and adult larvae of
Asian Corn Borer in the maize field.
- If the severe infestation is

Corn Earworm
Scientific name: Heliothis armigera (Hubner)
Mature larvae have stripes varying from light green to nearly black along their bodies. The colour depends on the environment, larval age
and molting. Mature larvae or moths usually harbour in the leaf axils.
Larvae are the only stage that damages maize ears. Larvae feed on silk and then bore into the ear tip. If the infestation occurs before the ears
are fully pollinated, ears are resulted in poor seed setting.
The insect outbreak is found in all planting areas.
- Natural enemies of Corn
earworm eggs are
Trichogramma spp., and natural enemies of Corn earworms are Tachinid flies and Camerons.
Whereas, natural enemies of both Corn earworms and their eggs are
Antlions.
- If the pesticide
severe in late rainy season
Ground Weevil
Scientific name: Calomycterus sp.
Ground weevil is the pest living in soil. Adult is a small beetle with rough blackish brown and grey skin. The length of body is 3.5 mm. Eggs
are white, oblong in shape and deposited singly.
During daytime, beetles usually harbour in the soil near the maize plants, especially newly germinated seedlings, and come out for feeding
after nightfall.
The beetles feed on maize leaves and seedlings including newly germinated seeds. They cause damage and kill seedlings. The seedlings that
survived from the damage will become stunted and branched out, causing an uneven maturity of maize, malformation of ears or barrenness.
The insect outbreak is found in all planting areas.

- In an area where the
infestation of Ground
Weevil is reported, seeds should be treated with insecticides for weevil before planting.
 - If the severe infestation
of weevil is found, i.e., the damaged leaves is higher than 50% and the damaged leaf area is higher than 30%, and the pesticide application is
required, follow the instructions on the labels or the recommendations of the Department of
Dry season especially in an area where there
Rats e.g. mice, rice-field rats and guinea pigs
Rats feed on maize leaves and seedlings
- Cultural practices, i.e.,
destroying rat shelters.
- Biological methods by

is no other food plant including newly germinated seeds. They cause damage and kill seedlings. The seedlings that survived from damage will become stunted
and branched out, causing an uneven maturity of maize, malformation of ears or barrenness.
The rats also destroy the maize during harvesting time
Guinea pigs (Bandicota spp.), attack the maize trunk and cause the plants fall down and feed on maize ears.
Black rats, rice-field rats, lesser rice-field rats
(members of the Rattus genera) and house mice (member of the Mus genera) climb up the plants and feed on maize ears.
The outbreak is found in all planting and storage areas.
means of natural enemies e.g. owls, birds, dogs, cats etc. by breeding and releasing these animals into the maize field.
- If the pesticide

APPENDIX D
UNITS
The units and symbols to be used in this Thai Agricultural Commodity Standard are the following recognized SI (The International System of Units or Le Système International d’
Unitès) units:

Type of Measurement
Name of Unit
Symbol
Length millimetre mm

centimetre cm

metre m
Temperature degree Celsius
°C