and Paraguay are included Source: extracted from CIMMYT, 1994. Note: see recipes based on maize in the annex. 1.7 Others. 1.7.1 Maize production and the need for adopting technology. Technological components are useful if they are used integrated in the production system for sustainable crop or animal production. Most farmers, particularly at the subsistence level, rarely adopt complete production packages, especially for crops such as maize, in zones when it has been produced for many years as a staple food and has become part of their traditional culture. It is deficient for them to afford drastic changes in their traditional technologies, unless they accept the risk of the innovations. However, there is a need for developing single production components which can be individually adopted by farmers as a mini package of technologies that can secure a noticeable and immediate yield increase (i.e. nitrogen, weed control, mulch, ridging system, manure, intercropping, etc) The production components varies in specifity such as a nutrients levels, cultivars, tillage system, date of planting, intercropping components or run off and erosion control system. In the following section, some basic concepts of tropical maize agronomy are presented as a background source of information. 1.7.2 Soil preparation (Basic concepts). Tillage can be defined as the chemical, physical or biological manipulation of soil to optimize germination, seedling emergence and crop establishment. This definition includes operations involved in producing a crop, such as chopping of residues, planting, applications of pesticides, fertilizers and harvesting. Although, there are many tillage systems, including zero-tillage, that are undoubtedly play a very important in determining the time-efficiency of a farmer, a system that optimize production and productivity should be chosen depending of the soil and agronomic and climatic conditions. Since the intervention of the plough, has been justified for many persons that the preparation of