countries, for instances, in the most recent workshop prepared by former Agro-industry and Post-harvest Management Service (AGSI-FAO) in Cambodia, the cost of the silo were lower when they compared with cost in Bolivia or Nicaragua. In addition, when the silo is implemented it also originates a positive critical mass impact in rural communities, since it increase economic activity and generate employment's, such as village's tinsmith, hardware needs, etc. 2.6.5.4 FAO Strategies for transferring the silo technology. · Through south-south co-operation by technician from GCP/BOL/032/NET · Modality: training workshop for trainer · Time: 2-4 weeks. · Primary target group: 5-15 post-harvest technician from national agricultural authorities · Secondary target group: farmers, tinsmith-village, technician from NGOs and others · Facilities for rotatory credits help farmers to acquire the silo · Publicity: demonstrations, radio, video films, leaflets and brochures, newsletter, etc · Highlight that the silo technology implementation involve a critical mass development among agricultural and livestock farmers, trader middlemen, hardware store, tinsmith village, etc. Fig. 33. The household small metallic silo for storage of grain. 2.6.6. Communal village stores. 2.6.6.1 Reasons for communal village store. There are some reasons to believe the need for cooperative storage instead of, or in addition to individual household storage: · Economies of scale allow (higher) investments in: store building material, materials and equipment for pest control and payment and training of a special person or persons directly in charge of the storage enterprise. · For grains which has been produced for the market, the profits of seasonal price increases can be shared by the (smallholder) producers instead of middlemen or traders. · Price fluctuations can be reduced if a part of the grain is to be bought back by the farmers from the village store. 2.6.6.2. Communal store types: These structures could be in the form