RESEARCH PAPER Evaluation of insect pest infestation and yield losses in maize crop in Maina, district Malakand Maqsood Ahmad1 and Shahzad Ahmad2 1Department of Plant Protection, The University of Agriculture Peshawar, Pakistan 2Department of Soil and Environmental Sciences, The University of Agriculture Peshawar, Pakistan *Corresponding author’s email: shahzad_maina@yahoo.com Received: 2 November 2018 Accepted: 30 December 2018 Key Message: The present study evaluates the major influence of insect pests including maize stem borer, aphid, shoot fly, armyworm, and maize jassid, on maize crop. The study measured infestation rates and resulting yield losses, emphasizing the need for prompt pest control measures to reduce economic losses. Abstract Maize (Zea mays) is the third most significant cereal crop in Pakistan. It plays a crucial role in the local diet and serves as a vital component in livestock fodder and poultry feed. Moreover, it has gained commercial importance in the food industry, contributing to the production of items such as corn oil, cornflakes, popcorn, and Rafhan. Its yield is severely affected by insect pests. Therefore, this study investigated the insect pest infestation and associated yield losses in maize crops in Maina, District Malakand. The experiment recorded the percentage of plant infestation by insect pests and quantified the resultant losses. Maize stem borer (Chilo partelus) exhibited a significant infestation of 23.50 %, followed by maize aphid (Rhopalosiphum maidis) at 15 % during the tasseling stage. Shootfly (Atherigona soccata) showed early-stage infestation with 9 %, and maize jassid (Zygenia sp) appeared with a population of 2 jassids/sweep net. Armyworm (Mythimna unipuncta) was also identified as a pest with 7.1 % plant infestation. The cumulative grain losses due to these pests were calculated as 1112 kg/ha. Maize cultivation in Pakistan holds significant economic importance, contributing to various sectors, and sustaining local diets. In this context, effective pest management