main processed product, there is also a large volume of by- products, including the husk, bran and broken grains. Therefore, small rice farmers could benefit from useful technologies for rice products and by-products. Efficient technologies can enhance quality and safety in milling rice processing and offer great potential in terms of the utilization of by-products. In both cases, there is added value which increases returns. Strengthening the rice small industry sector is in line with the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) which aim to reduce extreme poverty and eradicate hunger in poor countries. It is important to apply modern or innovative processing technologies to traditional rice products. This applies in particular to those countries which have entered the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and must upgrade the uniformity, quality and shelf-life of the product and comply with various requirements (e.g. specification of ingredients). Therefore, the improvement of rice-processing small and medium enterprises (SMEs) – whether for rice products or by-products – is a matter of great importance within FAO’s Technical Cooperation Programme, and specifically within AGST. The main approach is to enhance capacity-building for rice in developing countries by facilitating the interchange and transfer of technologies to add value and create opportunities for income generation and employment among farmers or people associated with these activities within the food chain of rice and rice by-products. The appropriate technical use of paddy rice should be seen as an important action to be carried out by rice farmers and agroprocessors to convert it into an efficient and profitable business through implementation of cost-effective and environmentally friendly methods and technologies. In some countries (e.g. Indonesia), small-scale rice industry development has had a significant impact on the GDP, resulting in the reduction of poverty to some extent. Thus, the promotion of the small-scale food