of iron and zinc in typical Asian rice diets is generally low: they come mainly from plant sources, and rice and legumes contain phytate which binds minerals and proteins including enzymes (Calloway, 1995). Table 2 shows the composition of rice and its edible fraction. In recent years, in some countries (e.g. Japan), rice bran has been associated with good health, thanks to several active components, including: rice bran oil (reduces cholesterol), γ-Oryzanol and Ferulic acid (antioxidants), Inositol (for liver function and healthy hair) and sterols (for cholesterol metabolism). These components offer potential in both the food and the cosmetic industry (Tsuno-Co., 2004). Moreover, the hypocholesterolaemic effects of stabilized rice bran reduce plasma cholesterol due to the presence of a unsaponificable fraction and the effect of rice bran hemi cellulose (Suzuki et al., 1962). FIGURE 1 Rice grain section showing protective layers Source: RIRDC, 2003. FIGURE 2 Paddy rice components Source: RIRDC, 2003. POST-HARVESTING OF RICE ASSOCIATED WITH QUALITY During post-harvest operations related to rice, an efficient on-farm handling, storage, processing and distribution system is essential to ensure acceptable quality and safety of the grain. Environmental conditions during grain ripening and drying in the field may affect the processing characteristics of the rice grain (Juliano, 1996). Early- maturing (90-100 days) tends to be more immature than medium-maturing rice (130-140 days). Immature grains reduce head rice yield and result in completely chalky grains. Thinner grains also tend to have lower amounts of brown rice and total and head-milled rice than normal grains (Wadsworth and Hayes, 1991). Drying is the most critical post-harvest operation, particularly in the wet season, for maintaining the quality of the rice grain (Juliano, 1996). Aflatoxin is produced mainly in the bran polish fraction of brown rice (Ilag and Juliano, 1982). During post-harvest operations, numerous factors can affect quality: