on common lands and along the borders of farms, thereby reducing dependence on cattle dung for fuel; install biogas plants where appropriate. • Adopt suitable technologies for good quality compost production from easily available farm or agricultural wastes and other organic sources; apply compost and farmyard manure (FYM) in the most appropriate season. • Where appropriate, practise alley-cropping or green manuring or introduce a legume crop (grain or fodder) in the cropping system, inoculating, if necessary, with efficient Rhizobium strains. • Introduce effective strains of Azolla and blue-green algae in rice-based cropping systems in appropriate agro-ecological situations. • Assess nutrients supplied through organic sources and apply the balance of the recommended dose through mineral fertilizers, taking into account a 15 percent increase in efficiency of the mineral fertilizers due to the complementary effects of the organic sources and mineral fertilizers. • Monitor soil nutrient status against crop yield performance and make any necessary adjustments to the fertilizer schedule. • Perform an economic evaluation of the integrated system. The precise model for each country depends on the agro- ecological conditions, cropping systems and available plant nutrient resources, as well as the infrastructural, organizational, research and development support available. Long-term experimental results The sustainability of the rice cropping system is important for food security. Intensive cropping with no return of crop residues and other organic inputs results in loss of soil organic matter (SOM) and nutrient supply and is assumed to be non-sustainable. Seven treatments comprising various combinations of green manure (GM; Sesbania cannabina L.), wheat straw (WS), FYM and urea were applied to study the effects on yield and yield trend, P and K balance, and soil fertility, as part of a rice- wheat experiment (1988-2000) on loamy sand in Punjab, India (Table 5). Rice yields were comparable with GM +