adding value to traditional milled rice and its by-products. The Agricultural and Food Engineering Technologies Service (AGST) of FAO has a mandate to support such activities; in addition to technical support and organization, funding support is required to improve the development of small rice enterprises. The International Rice Commission (IRC) comprises 61 member countries. Its international conference, organized every 4 years, is an important event for members to share recent experiences related to rice production and post-production. Asian rice farmers traditionally use wholegrain rice and its by-products at artisan level. This experience could be shared with other countries and used as a basis to promote development of the agro-industry sector. Some governments and research institutions have carried out activities and developed strategies to promote small industry through the integral and efficient use of paddy rice. In recent years, AGST-FAO has prepared technical reports on this subject, identifying ways to strengthen the small rice industry sector: The use of high-yielding varieties (HYVs) presents new challenges in terms of infrastructure development, and also in terms of innovative technologies for adding value to rice and its by-products (a good source of employment and income generation). The establishment of viable agroprocessing enterprises in rural areas producing rice is crucial, not only in Asia but in other developing countries of Africa and Latin America; investment in technologies that are affordable and add quality and commercial value to rice products and by-products will enhance the demand for farm produce. The revision of whole grain rice utilization is important for promoting the small rice industry (rice by-products are currently under-used, resulting in problems of handling and pollution). BACKGROUND Carbohydrate demand declines as income increases; likewise, if income is low, the demand for rice increases. For some Asian countries, the decline in rice consumption is a matter for