association. This association fixes N in the order of 100-200 kg/ha/year. Mineral fertilizer resources The role of mineral fertilizers in plant nutrition for sustaining and increasing agricultural production is well recognized. In order to further improve fertilizer-use efficiency, reduce losses to the environment and promote the judicious use of mineral plant nutrient sources, the integrated plant nutrition systems (IPNS) approach aims to: • provide recommendations for a cropping system rather than a single crop in the system; • improve all the production factors and eliminate limiting factors, including secondary and micro- nutrients; and • minimize nutrient losses in the field through appropriate timing and methods of application. Operational approach A simplified operational approach is as follows: • Carry out a benchmark survey to assess actual availability of farm residues and other organic sources which are not appropriately used at present and could be used effectively for agricultural production. • Select major multiple cropping systems (including one grain or forage legume) – depending on agro- ecological conditions, produce markets, dietary preferences etc. • Follow appropriate soil management and conser- vation practices, including improvement of problem soils and crop management practices. • Schedule nutrient application rates, including secondary and micronutrients for the cropping system as a whole. • Apply N, P, K and micronutrients to the crop which makes best use of the nutrient in question; the following crop benefits from the residual effect. • Use all available organic materials for the farm lands; establish programmes for quick-growing trees for fuel wood on common lands and along the borders of farms, thereby reducing dependence on cattle dung for fuel; install biogas plants where appropriate. • Adopt suitable technologies for good quality compost production from easily available farm or agricultural wastes and other organic sources; apply compost and farmyard manure (FYM) in the