environment. IPNM offers great potential, therefore, in terms of: • saving of resources; • environment protection; and • economic cropping. Components Soil, mineral fertilizers, organic matter and atmospheric nitrogen, fixed by microorganisms or carried down in precipitation, are the major sources of plant nutrients. The natural plant nutrients found in the soil are deposited from the air or water, through nitrogen fixation and the weathering of soil mineral particles. Vegetation consumes a proportion of these nutrients; some are geographically redistributed by runoff; and some are lost by volatilization, fixation and leaching. Farmers harvest the natural supply of these nutrients for their crops and reorganize their distribution in space and time through their production systems. Soil resources Soils contain natural reserves of plant nutrients in quantities that depend on soil composition and the stage of weathering. These reserves are often in forms which are unavailable to plants and only a small portion is released each year through biological activity or chemical processes. This release is much too slow to compensate for the removal of nutrients from agricultural production, especially in the humid tropics where soils are strongly weathered. The quantities (or stock) of plant nutrients available for a crop are determined by: • the supply of nutrients to the crop from internal and external sources; • the uptake of nutrients by the crop; and • losses of plant nutrient to the environment. To enhance the soil nutrient supply, it is necessary to reduce nutrient loss by suitable soil management practices: improving problem soils to mobilize availability of nutrients and adopting appropriate crop varieties, cultural practices and cropping systems to maximize the utilization of available nutrients. Organic resources Organic manures are valuable by-products of farming and allied industries, derived from plant and animal sources. Available organic resources include farmyard manure and animal