during milling has been observed (Kohlwey, 1992). The rice milling industry can promote small and medium agrobusinesses through improved quality control of paddy rice and the milling process. Rice quality improvement should be in line with consumer preferences and affordability. Quality is not the only means for promoting rice at national and international level in order to obtain higher prices. Other potential niches for rice milled products exist, for example organic rice and brown rice: • Organic certification requires special conditions for production, but it opens up market opportunities. • Brown rice (or husked rice) is minimally processed and retains the bran layers with high nutritional properties; it is recommended to apply parboiling and vacuum and opaque packaging for increased shelf-life. PROCESSED RICE PRODUCTS In developed countries, there is a high level of consumption of processed rice products made mainly by large rice-processing enterprises. Developing countries, on the other hand, produce a smaller quantity of processed rice products, and there is therefore a good opportunity to promote the small rice industry. Processed rice products include pre-cooked and quick-cooking rice, noodles, rice cakes and pudding, expanded or puffed rice, baked rice products, fermented rice, rice flour and starch, and are derived from brown rice, milled rice, cooked rice, broken rice, dry-milled flour and rice starch. Precooked and quick-cooking rice Precooked rice is used for rice-based convenience food products. These are hermetically sealed in laminated plastic or aluminium-laminated plastic pouches and pasteurized at 120°C under pressure (Juliano and Sakurai, 1985). Before consumption, the aluminium-laminated plastic pouch is warmed directly in hot water for 10 to 15 minutes; plastic pouches may be punctured and heated in a microwave oven for 1 to 2 minutes. Frozen cooked rice packed in airtight plastic pouches has been in great demand in some countries (e.g. Japan). Likewise,