density were tested. The treatments are shown in Table 6. With 30-30 + 5 tonnes/ha manure, farmers’ plot yield was 2-3 tonnes/ha, while yield in the plots with adequate density of 260 pl/m2 was 5-6 tonnes/ha. The project successfully demonstrated that, with correct utilization of organic resources, it is possible to: • conserve the soil fertility; • make agricultural production more sustainable; and • minimize the costs and economic risks associated with high dosage of fertilizers. Extending IPNM for wider adoption Farmers should be motivated to make optimum use of organic, inorganic and biological fertilizers. They need to be made aware of their nutrient-supplying potential and the resulting physico-chemical and biological benefits for the soil, with enhanced productivity. Departments of agricultural extension, private enterprises and NGOs (non-governmental organizations), together with research and educational institutes, have a vital role to play in the promotion of IPNM practices to farmers. Efforts should focus on creating awareness and expertise in farmers in the efficient use of those fertilizers, locally-available organic manures and biofertilizers which are most suitable to the needs of the area and the cropping systems as a whole. In order to promote adoption of the technology, a programme could be set up to establish knowledgeable groups of farmers who have been trained in appropriate IPNM techniques, and who have the necessary potential to transmit expertise to fellow farmers. One possible means of achieving this is the organization of farmer field schools (FFS). For the effective implementation of improved agricultural practices, adopting a holistic approach, extension workers must be effective and innovative managers. Farmers require exposure to improved TABLE 6 Treatments N-P2O5 + Manure (tonnes/ha) Plant density (pl/m2) 15-15 + 30-30 + 60-60 + Control: Farmer's plot without fertilizer technology and practical training; they must be adaptable and capable of organization with