with agrosan GN has also given satisfactory results; since the pathogen survives inside the husk, chemical treatments may not be very effective. Hot-water treatment has been found to be quite effective. Since the thermal death point of the conidia ranges from 50°C to 52°C for 10 minutes, pre-soaking of grains has been recommended for 24 hours in water at ordinary temperature, followed by steeping them in hot water at 54°C for five minutes. Protective spraying and dusting of the crop has been recommended. Spraying of Bordeaux mixture (3:3:50), perenox, or organic sulphur compounds like dithane Z-78 has been proved effective to some extent, and dusting with organomercurials (ceresan) diluted with lime has been proved effective in reducing infection. Proper manuring should keep nitrogen and phosphorus levels well-balanced, since excess or deficiency of nitrogen fertilizers increases the susceptibility of the plants. Stem Rot of Rice The pathogen is Sclerotium oryzae Catt. (with a conidial stage referred to as Helminthosporium sigmoideum Cav., conidial stage Leptosphaeria salvinii Catt., perfect stage). Systematic position: conidial stage (Helminthosporium sigmoideum Cav.) — class Deuteromycetes, order Moniliales, family Dematiaceae; perfect stage (Leptosphaeria salvinii Catt.) — class Ascomycetes, order Pseudosphaerales, family Pleosporaceae. The sclerotial stage itself is classified as class Deuteromycetes, order Mycelia Sterilia, conidial sterile. The sclerotial stage of stem rot of rice was first described by Cattaneo from Italy in 1876. Later, in India, the disease was reported by Shaw from Bengal in 1911. It has since been confirmed that the disease occurs in all rice-growing countries of the world such as Japan, China, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Italy, Brazil, and the United States of America. In Tamil Nadu, in years of heavy infection, yield loss goes up to 75 percent; in Punjab, the crop is sometimes subjected to heavy infestation in August-September with yield loss ranging from