Introduction
Preface
There is currently a wealth of statistics on food and agriculture being provided both
by FAO and other global data suppliers. Not only are the volume and coverage of
data vast, but so is the diversity. This is a reﬂection of the fact that agriculture is now
increasingly intertwined with many other sectors, the environment, the wider economy
and with society.
However, we noticed a clear gap in the knowledge arena in terms of a missing platform
that brings together all of the data in a coherent and systematic way, so that readers
can easily access and absorb the depth and breadth of agriculture’s role in the world
today. We hope this FAO statistical year book ﬁlls such gap.
In presenting this publication, the FAO Statistics Division would like to acknowledge
the combined efforts of statisticians around the world, in particular staff in min-
istries of agriculture and statistical ofﬁces, in international institutions and in non-
governmental organizations, whose efforts have made this publication possible.
This book has been prepared by a team from the FAO Statistics Division led by Adam
Prakash and Matthieu Stigler, with substantial technical assistance from Filippo Gheri.
We acknowledge the comments and suggestions from within FAO’s Economic and So-
cial Department, including Denis Drechsler, Concepción Calpe, Piero Conforti, Jelle
Bruinsma, Josef Schmidhuber, Seth Meyer, Amy Heyman, Carlo Caﬁero, Nathalie
Troubat, Chiara Brunelli, Eve Crowley and Elisenda Estruch. Valuable comments from
colleagues in other FAO departments are also acknowledged, especially Tsuji Sachiko,
Karen Frenken, Eugenia Serova, Lorraine Williams, John Ruane, Andrea Sonnino and
Modibo Traore.
We would also like to thank Natalia Ermolaev for editorial assistance. The contribution
of Boris Veytsman in designing and producing book via a dedicated L ATEX package is ac-
knowledged and that of Giancarlo de Pol for the graphical concept. Finally, Emmanuel
Blondel and Professor Roger Bivand provided precious assistance on the presentation
of geo-referenced data, and Guido Barbaglia for the data download API.
We would also like to take this opportunity to say a few words about how the FAO
Statistical Yearbook was produced. This book has been created with innovative open-
source tools, employing a combination of R and L ATEX to generate the entire publication:
from data retrieval to data processing to indicator construction to a blueprint-ready
PDF ﬁle for distribution. Our innovation circumvented the traditional route of manual
production, involving costly software licenses, signiﬁcant labour costs and inefﬁcien-
cies associated with a lack of cycle integration. The R–L ATEX solution also empowered
FAO statisticians in managing how their data were to be presented.
Adam Prakash, Matthieu Stigler
Foreword
Achieving food security for all is at the heart of FAO’s mission, by making sure peo-
ple have regular access to enough high-quality food to lead active, healthy lives. Our
mission is premised on the need to raise levels of nutrition, improve agricultural pro-
ductivity, better the lives of rural populations and ensure that agriculture can be a
sustainable platform for economic growth. Beyond its essential role in food security,
sustainable agricultural development is now regarded as pivotal in strategies towards
poverty alleviation. In addition, policy makers agree that agriculture will be key to
effectively address challenging issues of our time, including climate change, water
scarcity, environmental pollution and land degradation. Agriculture has a clear role
in providing ecosystem services to protect the environment and preserve our planet’s
natural resource base. With the sector now intertwined with almost every topic in the
development agenda, a major challenge is to capture and monitor the multiple roles
of agriculture.
Providing reliable and timely information on the status of food and agricultural sectors
in multiple contexts is an important part of the FAO mandate and in particular of
the FAO Statistics Division. In response to the demands for a more comprehensive
set of statistics and indicators that are amenable to an ever-widening audience, we
have attempted to meet the challenge through radically overhauling the usual FAO
Statistical Yearbook format. The revised publication will continue the long tradition
of the FAO Statistical Yearbook series as the foremost collection and reference point
of statistical data on food and agriculture, but the new publication marks a transition.
In rising to the call for a broader and more in-depth examination of the many roles
of agriculture, this edition leans towards a thematically-driven, statistical snapshot of
the major trends and issues related to world food and agriculture. Divided into four
parts and encompassing 34 dimensions of food and agrciulture, the new FAO Statistical
Yearbook employs over 350 indicators drawn from data sources within FAO, sister UN
agencies, the World Bank and other international organizations.
The new Yearbook approach makes us all keenly aware of the need to improve the
quality, quantity and scope of agricultural and development statistics. Concerted ef-
forts are, however, being made by FAO and our partners to enhance country capacities
in providing better and more statistical information. Though presenting an accessible
statistical synthesis of the key issues affecting world food and agriculture, it is our
desire that the book raises awareness about the multiple challenges confronting the
sector, thereby strengthening FAO’s resolve towards ﬁghting hunger and improving the
livelihoods of the rural poor.
Pietro Gennari
Director, FAO Statistics Division
How to use this book
The 2012 edition of the FAO Statistical Yearbook represents a break away from FAO
tradition. Through employing data from global statistical providers, including FAO,
the publication presents a visual synthesis of the major trends and factors shaping the
global food and agricultural landscape and their interplay with broader environmental,
social and economic dimensions. In doing so, it strives to serve as a unique reference
point on the state of world food and agriculture for policy-makers, donor agencies,
researchers and analysts as well as the general public.
The book is subdivided into four thematic parts, where an attempt is made to exhaus-
tively present the spectrum of issues relevant to the subject matter:
Part 1 The setting measures the state of the agricultural resource base, by assess-
ing the supply of land, labour, capital, inputs and the adequacy of infrastructure,
and also examines the pressure on the world food system stemming from demo-
graphic and macroeconomic change
Part 2 Hunger dimensions gauges the state of food insecurity and malnutrition, mea-
suring the multitude of dimensions that give rise to hunger and those that shape
undernourishment
Part 3 Feeding the world evaluates the past and present productive capacity of world
agriculture together with the role of trade in meeting changing food, feed and
other demands
Part 4 Sustainability dimensions examines the sustainability of agriculture in the con-
text of the pressure it exerts on the environment, including the interaction of
agriculture with climate change, and how it can provide ecosystem services in
relation to the bio-based economy
Multiple page spreads are used to present each thematic issue. Each spread contains
a visualization of the data by way of maps and charts and is accompanied by text that
provides a background to the salient issues as well as an assessment of current trends.
Data are made available for virtually all countries in the world, excluding principalities
and minor territories.
We follow the M49 convention of the United Nations Statistics Division in reporting
“geographical regions for statistical use”. See (http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/
m49/m49regin.htm). The most recent data are given, but when country data have
not been reported for the reference year, an asterisk (*) is placed on the year label to
indicate “closest to” that year.
How to retrieve Yearbook data
The data used in this book are presented via charts and maps that form the basis of key
indicators. A more detailed overview of the data is provided by way of tables located
at the end of each thematic part. Documentation about the data, their methodology
and sources can be found through the MetaLink key below each indicator. For the web
version, the user can simply click on the MetaLink key, and will be directed to infor-
mation about the data. Furthermore, a small icon allows the user to directly download
the data presented in each indicator.
The Webservice API
Underlying the direct download is a new Webservice system that gives direct access
to the datasets employed by the Yearbook. While most users will simply use the icon-
based direct link, those users who regularly use the data will undoubtedly beneﬁt from
the Webservice facility. The Webservice relies on REST API technology, which offers
different ways to access the data, as well as alternative formats for retrieving them.
Base link: The base link is http://ldvapp07.fao.org:8030/wds/api?db=faosyb
Output format: Users can either visualise the data in the web browser with out=hmtl
or download data in csv, Excel xls or xml by specifying the argument: out=csv
(or excel, or xml).
The content: The Webservice offers different ways to specify the data to download:
By object key as provided in the book: download all the data used
in the given chart/map/table, and is executed by using the argument:
object=chart5 . For example:
http://ldvapp07.fao.org:8030/wds/api?db=faosyb&out=html&object=
chart5
By dataset name: download all the data contained in a given dataset (of-
ten more than what is provided by the indicator). Executed by using the
argument: dataset=x . For example:
http://ldvapp07.fao.org:8030/wds/api?db=faosyb&out=html&dataset=
P1.DEM.UN.WPP .FER.TOT
Finally, a few speciﬁc requests are provided that allow users to retrieve:
The list of dataset keys used and their label. Use:
http://ldvapp07.fao.org:8030/wds/api?db=faosyb&out=html&dataset=list
The list of country codes, with their equivalent in ISO2, ISO3, UN and GAUL code.
Use:
http://ldvapp07.fao.org:8030/wds/api?db=faosyb&out=html&ﬁndcode=list
Yearbook data directly accessible from within the statistical software R
T o further facilitate the download and use of the data contained in the Yearbook, the
Webservice API will be callable from within R – a free and open-source software plat-
form popular worldwide. T o keep abreast of updates, readers and users are encouraged
to visit the Yearbook’s website:
www.fao.org/economic/ess/syb
