Rice areas in several countries in the Western Hemisphere
are seriously affected by the presence of several weeds.
The most troublesome weeds in rice are species of the
genus Echinochloa. However, there is an increase
worldwide in problems with weedy rice, which reduces
crop yields and affects quality more than Echinochloa
crus-galli. Yield reduction can even be as much as
80 percent (Smith, 1988). Weedy rice is the same species
as cultivated rice (i.e. it usually has the same genome),
but it behaves differently. It normally grows faster; makes
better use of the available N; produces more tillers,
panicles and biomass in general; shatters earlier; has better
resistance to adverse dry conditions; and possesses longer
dormancy in soil (Cohn 2002; Gu, Chen and Foley, 2003).
The problem of weedy rice has grown with the increase
in direct-seeded rice in several countries, including parts
of Southeast and South Asia. Given the importance of
the problem, FAO conducted activities to assist
developing countries to reduce weedy rice infestations
in rice. FAO began with the organization of a global
workshop on the subject, held in Varadero, Cuba (FAO,
1999), with the participation of specialists from
17 countries. The workshop concluded that high weedy/
red rice incidence in many rice-producing countries is
due to the increase in use of unclean rice seeds,
monocropping and wrong cultural practices during the
crop cycle. These conclusions point to the need to adopt
an integrated management approach, where sources of
weedy rice are reduced using several management
strategies.
Strategies for the control of weedy rice are diverse and
their implementation depends on the specific site
conditions. However, any control measure should aim to
reduce the weedy/red rice seed bank in soil in the medium
or long term.
Following the workshop, various countries from Latin
America requested FAO’s technical assistance for the
implementation of a project aimed at the control of weedy
rice.
RESULTS OF FAO WEEDY RICE PROJECT IN
CENTRAL AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
The project consisted of participatory training for farmers
through the implementation of two farmer field schools
(FFS), where farmers learned elements of the ecology of
weedy rice and its control. Six countries were involved:
• Colombia. Rice is grown on 320 000 ha. The crop
is normally grown twice a year and monocropping
is a normal practice. Use of uncertified rice seeds
of low quality is common in areas of poor farmers.
• Costa Rica. The rice area is approximately
40 000 ha distributed in five regions: Chorotega,
Brunca, North Huetar, Central Pacific and Atlantic.
The area infested by weedy rice is almost 19 500 ha.
The major weedy rice species are Oryza sativa L.
and O. latifolia Desv. (known locally as “arrozón”).
Incidence is greatest in fields where rice is cropped
twice.
• Cuba. Rice is the country’s major staple, grown in
an area of less than 200 000 ha, of which 35 percent
is severely affected by weedy rice. In heavily infest-
ed areas, yield losses account for up to 89 percent.
This problem is aggravated by the reduced prod-
uction of certified rice seed or the use of bad quality
seeds contaminated with weedy rice seeds.
• Nicaragua. Weedy rice is present in all rice-
producing areas of the country with infestation at
more than 80 panicles/m2. The main weedy rice
species are Oryza sativa and O. latifolia with
infestation of up to 40 percent in rice fields. Farmers
do not use certified seeds and no specific method is
practised to control this weed.
• Panama. Rice is grown on more than 75 000 ha,
mainly in the provinces of Chiriquí (54%), Coclé
(14%), Panama (Chepo) (11%) and Veraguas (9%).
Rice yields are not high due to the use of uncertified
seeds with low germination level, and because of
high pest incidence, including the problem of weedy
rice.
Weedy rice problems and solutions for
its management
R. Labrada
Agricultural Weed Officer, Plant Protection Service, FAO, Rome, Italy

• Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). The rice area
is approximately 140 000 ha, predominantly in the
states of Portuguesa, Guárico, Cojedes and Barinas.
Weedy rice is one of the major constraints to rice
production, with 88 percent of the crop area infested
by weedy rice, sometimes with a stand of 17 or
18 plants/m2. The main species of weedy rice in
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) are Oryza sativa
L., O. rufipogon Griff. and O. latifolia Desv.
The project included the education of pilot groups of
farmers on weedy rice biology and control strategies. For
this purpose, FFS were implemented and farmers met
every 2 weeks to discuss the results of their observations
in the field. Training covered studies of viable weed seed
bank in soil using the methodology proposed by Forcella,
Webster and Cardinia (2003), collection of weedy rice
biotypes and their germination. Farmers were helped to
understand the sources of weedy rice infestation and to
design management procedures. The importance of using
clean rice seeds free of weedy rice seeds was stressed.
This strategy, together with pre-planting control of the
weed, was the management approach adopted in most
places.
Pre-planting control
In some areas, the pre-planting method consisted of land
preparation in dry soils, followed by fast irrigation,
puddling, draining the field for the emergence of new
weed flushes, application of glyphosate, flooding again
and rice seeding over a slight water layer. In other areas,
land preparation began with puddling, draining the field,
glyphosate application, flooding and seeding as above.
The control of weed flushes in some areas was conducted
mechanically after drainage. In Nicaragua, this method
increased yields by 25 percent and improved the quality
of the produce.
In Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), after the
harvest, crop residues in infested fields were burnt – an
operation which encouraged germination of weedy rice
seeds remaining in the soil surface. Soil moisture was
maintained for a period of 85 days, until infestation
reached a level of 130 plants/m2. Land preparation was
then conducted followed by flooding and drainage; it was
left for another 15 days until there was a new weed flush;
the same operation was then repeated for another flush,
after which the area was flooded over the weed stand
and herbicide (oxadiargyl at a rate of 1.15 litres/ha) was
applied and kept for 8 days. The field was drained and
2 days later pre-germinated rice seeds were planted.
Other control methods
The leguminous plant Sesbania rostrata Brem. has been
tested in Cuba for short crop rotation – it successfully
smothered weedy rice.
In all FFS, emphasis was placed on the importance of
roguing – either manually or using glyphosate – shortly
before harvest to avoid an increase in weed seed bank in
the soil. In Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), farmers
were well trained in procedures for cleaning the machi-
nery coming from rice fields infested by weedy rice.
IMI RICE TECHNOLOGY
The idea of using herbicide-resistant rice for the
successful control of weedy rice is not new. Three
companies have been working on this matter:
• Transgenic Liberty Link® rice is being developed
by Aventis to resist glufosinate- ammonium
herbicide.
• Roundup Ready® rice, developed by Monsanto,
tolerates glyphosate.
• IMI rice (known commercially as Clearfield®) was
engineered through mutation to tolerate imidaz-
olinone herbicides and is being commercialized by
BASF.
IMI rice is not a transgenic crop, and has been adopted
for use in several countries, including the United States,
Costa Rica, Colombia and Uruguay. It is mutated rice
developed by radioactive bombardment of a conventional
rice plant – a technology that has been used to achieve
short-stature rice varieties (Annou et al., 2001).
In the United States, IMI rice is associated with the
use of the imidazolinone herbicide, imazethapyr, an ALS
inhibitor. The herbicide is applied after planting at
5 ounces per acre (approx. 0.346 kg/ha) in drill-seeded
systems, while in water-seeded fields, seeding flood is
put on after the first application of the herbicide, the water
pulled off and the seedlings are then allowed to establish.
Normally one application of this herbicide (non-selective
to rice) is enough. That is why farmers apply twice or
even use some mixtures with other herbicides, such as
pendimethalin and propanil. This treatment can reduce
enormously the stand of weedy rice (Rodd 2004).
However, an outcrossing between IMI herbicide-
resistant rice and weedy rice has recently been discovered

in Arkansas (Schultz, 2004) – demonstration of the fact
that farmers must not abuse herbicide-resistant material.
Genetic testing confirmed that weedy rice contains the
resistant gene that prevents imazethapyr from damaging
rice plants. The resistant hybrids are tall plants with
compact, erect and rough leaves. According to extension
workers, not planting IMI rice two growing seasons in a
row is probably the most important measure to ensure
the longevity of this technology.
It is clear that there is no technology that can control
100 percent of any weed population. Normally a low
resistant weed population will be selected quickly if the
same herbicide is used repeatedly. In addition, the ALS
inhibitors are recognized as herbicides with high selection
pressure and able to select a resistant weed population in
a few years.
One solution to the problem of resistance is to rotate
the area with conventional rice or with other crops, but
lowland areas for rice are often not suitable for growing
any other crop, and the use of conventional rice will
depend on the level of imazethapyr residue in the soil.
The technology offers a potential solution to farmers
– provided that they use it rationally. The use of more
than one crop of IMI rice will be enough to achieve a
substantial reduction in weedy rice. Additional reduction
of the weed can be achieved using other cultural
procedures; but these should not be abused with additional
cropping of the IMI cultivar. Crop or rice cultivar rotation
has an important role in preserving the usefulness of IMI.
SITUATION OF WEEDY RICE IN ASIA
Until recently, Asia had no problem of weedy rice, due
to the fact that transplanted rice was the main planting
method. In the United States and most Latin American
countries, the situation is different because direct-seeded
rice prevails.
With the opening of new factories, people have moved
from rural to urban areas, reducing considerably the
labour formerly used for planting and weeding. It is for
this reason that farmers have been compelled to shift from
transplanting to the direct-seeding method.
The area affected varies from country to country.
Thailand has more than 2 million ha seriously affected
by weedy rice, while more than 500 000 ha are also
infested by the weed in the Mekong River Delta in Viet
Nam. Malaysia, Sri Lanka and the Philippines have a
substantial area affected, as direct-seeded areas are
increasing every year. Current agronomic practices will
continue to contribute to making weedy rice the most
troublesome weed in rice in the twenty-first century.
Different techniques have been adopted in some Asian
countries to manage weedy rice infestation. However,
these technologies have not been adopted in many parts
of developing Asia, where weedy rice has become a
perennial problem for various reasons, including absence
of technology transfer and appropriate communication
technologies, lack of awareness, and poor farmer attitude.
The lack of interaction and communication among
scientists on environmentally sound and integrated
technologies to control weedy rice has resulted in less
attention being paid to capacity-building in the sphere of
weedy rice management in Asia.
Since rice is the main staple in several Asian countries,
there is an urgent need to implement programmes and
projects aimed at weedy rice management. The approach
adopted in Latin America by the FAO TCP project on
weedy rice can be applied in South and Southeast Asia.
Annou, M., Thomsen, M., Wailes, E. & Garner, G.L.
2001. Implications of rice biotechnology on optimal rice
crop rotation in the Mississippi River Delta region.
Southern Agricultural Economics Association, Annual
Meeting, Fort Worth, Texas, 27-31 Jan.
Cohn, M.A. 2002. Seed dormancy in red rice. A balance of
logic and luck. Weed Sci., 50: 261-266.
FAO. 1999. Report of Global Workshop on Red Rice
Control. Varadero, Cuba, 30 Aug. - 3 Sept. 156 pp
(available at www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPP/IPM/Weeds/
download/arroroj.pdf).
FAO. 2005. Final Report TCP/RLA/2913. Rome, FAO. 20 pp.
Forcella, F., Webster, T. & Cardina, J. 2003. Protocols
for weed seed bank determination in agro-ecosystems.
In R. Labrada, ed. Weed management for developing
countries, p. 3-18. Addendum I. FAO Plant Production
and Protection Paper No. 120. Rome, FAO.
Gu, X.Y., Chen, Z-X. & Foley, M.E. 2003. Inheritance of
seed dormancy in weedy rice. Crop Sci., 43: 835-843.
Rodd, M.A. 2004. Herbicide-resistant rice varieties
expected (available at www.ricejournal.com/backissues/
january2001/story3.asp).
Schultz, B. 2004. Guidelines help protect Clearfield
(available at deltafarmpress.com/mag/farming_
guidelines_help_protect/index.html).
Smith, R.J., Jr. 1988. Weed Thresholds in southern U.S.
rice (Oryza sativa). Weed Technology, 2: 232-241.

Le riz adventice est le résultat d’une
hybridation naturelle entre des
variétés cultivées et des variétés
sauvages qui a évolué depuis la
domestication du riz sauvage. Le riz
adventice a été introduit dans de
nombreux pays avec des semences de
riz importées d’Asie qui ont été
ensuite disséminées. Le riz adventice
n’a jamais été un véritable problème
tant que le riz a été repiqué mais le
manque de main-d’œuvre a contraint
plusieurs pays à recourir plus
fréquemment aux semis directs, et
c’est alors que la situation s’est
aggravée.
La concurrence du riz adventice
peut entraver les rendements, encore
plus que le millet à grappe
(Echinochloa crus-galli), du fait de la
production importante de talles et de
panicules par plante de la grande
quantité de biomasse et de la forte
absorption d’azote prélevée dans le
sol. Le riz adventice se développe
rapidement et devient plus
envahissant avec l’application
d’engrais. Le riz adventice s’égrène
en général avant le riz cultivé, et les
grains pénètrent ainsi dans le sol où
ils peuvent rester pendant longtemps.
Le riz adventice n’est pas facile à
éradiquer en utilisant un seul moyen
technique de lutte car il possède le
même génome que le riz cultivé. En
général le meilleur moyen de lutter
contre le riz adventice consiste à
utiliser des semences propres et à
effectuer un traitement avant les
semis, par exemple une préparation
de lit de semences, et d’arracher
ensuite les graines de riz adventice
qui ont germé par un procédé
mécanique ou en utilisant un
herbicide adapté, avant les semis de
riz.
Une question de grande importance
pour le secteur du riz est la possibilité
d’élaborer des populations de riz
adventice résistant aux herbicides
notamment en utilisant du riz
résistant à l’imacazolinone (IMI ou
Clearfield). Il a été scientifiquement
prouvé que l’hybridation entre le riz
Clearfield et le riz adventice peut se
produire et que le taux de croisement
varie selon les cultivars. Ces hybrides
de riz adventice ont été trouvés en
Arkansas. Il s’agit de plantes de
grandes dimensions, aux feuilles
compactes, droites et rugueuses. Le
riz Clearfield permet de réduire
considérablement l’infestation de riz
adventice au cours d’une campagne,
mais il n’est pas recommandé de
l’utiliser pendant deux ou trois
campagnes successives afin d’éviter
la formation d’hybrides résistant aux
herbicides. 
Problèmes liés au riz adventice: solutions proposées

El arroz maleza es un producto de
hibridación natural entre variedades
cultivadas y silvestres, que ha ido
evolucionando desde la
domesticación del arroz silvestre. El
arroz maleza se introdujo en muchos
países en la semillas de arroz
importadas de Asia y posteriormente
se distribuyó. Este arroz no constituía
realmente un problema en el arroz
trasplantado, pero debido a la escasez
de mano de obra en varios países y a
la adopción más generalizada de la
siembra directa, se ha convertido en
un problema grave.
El arroz maleza puede reducir los
rendimientos del arroz más que el
mijo de los arrozales (Echinochloa
crus-galli), ya que es muy
competitivo debido a la alta
producción de esquejes y panículas
por planta, el elevado volumen de
biomasa y la considerable extracción
de nitrógeno del suelo. El arroz
maleza alcanza mayor tamaño y se
vuelve más agresivo cuanto más
fertilizante se aplica. Las plantas de
arroz maleza suelen desgranar mucho
antes que el arroz cultivado, lo que le
permite acumular fácilmente su
banco de semillas de maleza en el
suelo. Asimismo, las semillas pueden
aguantar largos períodos en el suelo.
No es fácil luchar contra el arroz
maleza con una sola técnica de
control, pues se trata de una maleza
con el mismo genoma que la variedad
cultivada. Normalmente, la forma
más conveniente de luchar contra el
arroz maleza es mediante la
utilización de semillas de arroz
elaborado y un tratamiento previo a la
plantación, como por ejemplo una
preparación de semillero falsa, la
eliminación mecánica del arroz
maleza germinado o la utilización de
un herbicida adecuado antes de la
plantación de arroz.
Problemas relacionados con el arroz maleza y soluciones para su manejo
Una cuestión de gran importancia
para el sector del arroz es el
potencial para desarrollar
poblaciones de arroz maleza
resistentes a los herbicidas, sobre
todo con la utilización de arroz
resistente a la imidazolinona (IMI o
Clearfield). Las investigaciones han
demostrado que puede producirse la
hibridación entre el arroz Clearfield
y el arroz maleza, y el grado de
cruzamiento varía entre los
cultivares utilizados. Estos híbridos
de arroz maleza se han encontrado
en Arkansas y son plantas altas de
hojas compactas, rectas y ásperas.
Aunque la utilización de la
tecnología Clearfield reducirá
considerablemente la infestación de
arroz maleza en una campaña
agrícola, no se recomienda utilizarla
en dos o más campañas consecutivas
para evitar la presencia de estos
híbridos resistentes.

Production under irrigation and the highly-favoured
upland systems currently accounts for approximately
70 percent of all rice production in Latin American
countries. Production has increased from 16 million
tonnes of paddy in 1980 to 26 million tonnes in 2005.
However, farmers’ yields remain far below the potential
of the available varieties. This yield gap is the result of
numerous deficiencies, in particular inadequate crop
nutrition practices and their inefficient use (rice requires
large amounts of nitrogen and potassium). Two countries
are representative of the overall situation:
• In Brazil, nutrient balance studies are negative for
the three primary nutrients (N, P2O5, K2O), in
particular for nitrogen.
• In Peru, improved varieties respond to potassium,
especially where adequate nitrogen and phosphorus
are provided.
Sustainable rice production requires integrated manage-
ment of all the available nutrient resources. Integrated
nutrient management (INM) ensures the maintenance and
possible enhancement of soil fertility through balanced
and judicious use of mineral fertilizers combined with
organic and biological sources. The results are seen in
terms of improved nutrient efficiency, increased crop
productivity and minimized nutrient losses to the
environment. Rice-based cropping systems are ideal for
deriving benefits from INM.
This paper aims to give an idea of the work required
to close the rice yield gap in LAC (Latin America and
the Caribbean), and recommends the establishment of
nutrient balances in rice-based cropping systems, in order
to assist farmers to understand and adopt precision
nutrient input management.
RICE PRODUCTION IN LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES
Production increased from approximately 16 million
tonnes (paddy) to over 26 million tonnes in Latin
American countries between 1980 and 2005, even though
the area cultivated with rice decreased from 8.2 to
6.7 million ha (Table 1). The principal factor contributing
to increased rice production in the region is the increased
role of irrigated rice and the demise of upland rice,
particularly in Central America and Brazil. In spite of
the advancements in productivity, yields in the irrigated
sector are still relatively low, and far below the yield
potential of currently available varieties. There has been
little improvement in yield in the unfavoured upland sector
for numerous years.
Rice production in South America during the last two
decades (with the exception of the last 2 years) has seen
a rapid decline in the area planted with rice, accompanied
by a steady increase in overall production. Yield
advancement permits production to continue increasing,
despite the removal of large areas from rice cultivation.
During the 25-year period from 1980 to 2005, average
Impacts of integrated nutrient management on
sustainable rice production with particular
reference to Latin American countries
W. Burgos León a and R. Misra b
a Technical Officer and b Consultant
Land and Plant Nutrition Management Service, FAO, Rome, Italy
TABLE 1
Rice production and area harvested in LAC and the world
Area harvested (ha) 
Production (tonnes) 

World 
144 665 175 
147 700 874 
153 511 755 
396 871 255 
578 011 137 
614 654 895 
LAC 
8 207 132 
5 775 004 
6 746 722 
16 443 588 
22 227 167 
26 370 717 

yield in South America increased from 1.9 to 4.59 tonnes/
ha. The large decrease in the area of low-yielding upland
rice in central Brazil, combined with yield improvement
in irrigated rice in southern Brazil, contributed signif-
icantly to the rapid increase in average yield in South
America (Table 2).
Although increases in national yield are the norm for
most South American countries, not all countries are
advancing at the same rate. Yield improvement in Bolivia
was insignificant during the last 25 years, as a result of
the concentration of production in the unstable upland
sector. Yield improvement in Ecuador was also slow and
the poor progress may be attributed to the lack of
investment in irrigation management. National yields in
Colombia also grew slowly over the last two decades. In
the 1980s, Colombia was the country benefiting most
from the introduction of high-yielding, semi-dwarf plant
types, recording one of the highest national average yields
in South America. However, Colombia failed to keep pace
with other countries (in terms of yield improvement) and
the average national yield is currently inferior to that of
Uruguay, Peru and Argentina.
YIELD GAPS
Production under irrigation and the highly-favoured
upland systems currently accounts for approximately
70 percent of all rice production in LAC, and high-
yielding genotypes occupy more than 90 percent of these
areas. However, farmers’ yields remain far below the
potential of the available varieties. The average yield of
irrigated rice is approximately 5 tonnes/ha, but there is
high variability between and within production zones.
Even within a relatively homogenous area with the same
variety, farm yields are highly variable. In many
production zones, progressive farmers routinely obtain
yields of 7 tonnes/ha.
In late 1999 and early 2000, FAO commissioned a
study to explain the discrepancy between farmers’ yields
and readily obtainable yield (Pulver, Tran and Nguyen,
2000). The difference between readily obtainable yield
and average farm yield is referred to as the “yield gap”.
The study reported that the yield gap in 12 major rice-
producing countries ranges from 1 to 3 tonnes/ha and
averages 1.3 tonnes/ha. The yield gap is apparent in all
irrigated rice production areas.
The yield gap in irrigated rice is the result of numerous
deficiencies, in particular inadequate crop management
practices which fail to allow high-yielding genotypes to
express their yield potential. The yield gap is most striking
in countries where new, high-yielding varieties are
planted.
MINERAL FERTILIZER USE AND YIELD GAPS
Inadequate and inefficient use of mineral fertilizers is one
of the main reasons for the prevalent yield gaps. Table 3
gives the mineral fertilizer use in LAC. Total fertilizer
use in 2002 was 13.2 million tonnes in LAC, compared
to 141.5 million tonnes in the world (9.3 percent). Brazil
accounted for 58 percent of fertilizers used in LAC in
the same year.
NUTRIENT BALANCE IN LAC
Brazil
Agriculture in Brazil results in the removal from the soil
of a substantial quantity of nutrients that should be
replenished by fertilization, especially in the case of
nitrogen. In the long term, this situation can become
detrimental to the sustainability of agriculture. In the work
of Yamada and Lopes (1999) and in the data for 2002
(Table 4), the input of nutrients is based on mineral
fertilizers alone; no account is taken for manure and/or
nitrogen fixation in cover crops in crop rotation.
Effect of potassium and magnesium on rice grain yield
in coastal Peru
With its favourable sunny climate, coastal Peru has the
potential for high rice yields. Yields are higher than in
the surrounding countries due to substantial nitrogen use.
However, a great deal of yield potential is lost because
TABLE 2
Rice yield during the last 25 years in selected South
American countries
Yield (tonnes/ha) 
Country 
1980-82 a 1990-92 a 1999-2001 a 
Argentina 
3.53 
4.30 
5.40 
6.34 
Bolivia 
1.55 
1.95 
1.75 
2.17 
Brazil 
1.51 
2.10 
3.11 
3.34 
Chile 
3.02 
4.10 
4.80 
4.67 
Colombia 
4.29 
4.05 
4.84 
5.26 
Ecuador 
3.08 
3.14 
3.50 
4.13 
Guyana 
3.06 
3.29 
4.00 
3.86 
Paraguay 
1.87 
2.57 
4.09 
3.04 
Peru 
4.53 
5.14 
6.53 
6.71 
Suriname 
4.03 
3.79 
3.83 
3.80 
Uruguay 
5.19 
4.66 
6.49 
6.77 
Venezuela 
2.85 
4.18 
5.04 
5.00 
South America 
1.91 
2.58 
4.07 
4.59 
a 3-year averages.
Source: FAOSTAT.

phosphorus, potassium and magnesium are inadequately
supplied (PPIC, 2004). The crop uptake of K is quite
high but much remains in the straw. Improved varieties
respond to K, especially when given adequate N and P.
Response to K is generally greater on sandy soils.
Two sites at Pitipo and Vista Florida, in the rice
production area of Chiclayo, were selected for testing
different combinations of nutrients (PPIC, 2004):
• K2O: 0, 37, 74 and 111 kg/ha
• MgO: 0, 15 and 30 kg/ha
• N: 260 kg/ha (with all treatments)
• P2O5: 46 kg/ha (with all treatments)
In 2003, in terms of grain quality, the proportion of whole
grain in the sample equalled 49 percent for the control
treatment (0 K, 0 Mg) and 63 percent for the treatment
supplying 37 kg K2O/ha plus 15 kg MgO/ha.
In 2004, there was a significant response to increasing
K rates across Mg rates as follows:
• 0 kg K2O = 9 592 kg/ha
• 37 kg K2O = 9 716 kg/ha
• 74 kg K2O = 10 023 kg/ha
• 111 kg K2O = 10 217 kg/ha
The interaction between K and Mg was evident in the
percentage of undeveloped grain in the sample. The
treatment supplying 0 kg K2O and 0 kg MgO had
12 percent undeveloped grain and the treatment supplying
111 kg K2O and 30 kg MgO had 8 percent undeveloped
grain.
As an example of fertilizer use in this region, in terms
of kg/ha of N, P2O5, K2O and S, the rate is 138-30-0-18
in the north coast (Comunidad San Juan Bautista de
Catacaos, Piura) and 267-46-0-36 in Vista Florida-IDAL.
INTEGRATED PLANT NUTRITION MANAGEMENT
(IPNM)
A fertile soil provides a sound basis for flexible food
production systems that, within the constraints of soil and
climate, can grow a wide range of crops to meet changing
needs. Integrated plant nutrition management is an
indispensable tool for supporting high crop production
systems through soil fertility improvement while giving
due consideration to ecological concerns.
The basic principle underlying the concept of IPNM
is the maintenance and improvement of soil fertility
through integration and optimization of all possible plant
nutrient resources (i.e. organic, inorganic and biological)
appropriate to individual farming situations in their
ecological, social and economic perspective, for increased
crop productivity and quality. For developing IPNM
practices, the cropping systems rather than an individual
crop, and the farming systems rather than the individual
field, are the focus of attention. The objectives of IPNM
are to:
TABLE 3
Mineral fertilizer use in LAC (‘000 tonnes)
Nitrogen 
Phosphate 
Potash 
Country 

Argentina 
62.6 
101.4 
432.6 
44.1 
51.5 
283.3 
8.7 
12.6 
23.5 
Bolivia 
1.4 
2.3 
6.1 
0.7 
2.5 
6.6 
0.7 
0.3 
0.9 
Brazil 
905.4 
796.6 
1 816.0 
1 988.4 
1 201.6 
2 807.0 
1 306.5 
1 209.6 
3 059.0 
Chile 
50.8 
164.0 
210.0 
68.8 
113.7 
170.0 
13.0 
28.8 
75.0 
Colombia 
151.2 
311.8 
335.4 
81.1 
126.7 
135.9 
80.0 
163.8 
220.2 
Ecuador 
40.7 
39.4 
134.3 
14.3 
9.0 
38.4 
17.5 
19.6 
56.7 
Guyana 
4.2 
8.0 
14.4 
1.3 
2.2 
3.1 
0.2 
1.8 
0.3 
Paraguay 
1.3 
3.6 
34.9 
3.4 
11.1 
68.4 
1.5 
3.1 
49.8 
Peru 
84.8 
84.2 
209.4 
19.7 
12.7 
51.8 
13.6 
8.2 
12.6 
Suriname 
1.2 
0.6 
5.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.0 
0.2 
0.2 
0.5 
Uruguay 
21.1 
27.6 
54.2 
56.2 
41.2 
70.6 
3.6 
3.0 
4.0 
Venezuela (Bolivarian 
Republic of) 
 
113.0 
 
205.0 
 
190.0 
 
77.5 
 
119.0 
 
50.0 
 
50.5 
 
110.0 
 
60.0 
Source: FAOSTAT.
TABLE 4
Nutrient balance in Brazil, 2002 (kg/ha)
Region 
N 
P2O5 
K2O 
North 
-21.4 
-7.4 
-10.9 
Northeast 
-11.8 
-3.8 
-3.9 
Centre-west 
-8.6 
-8.5 
-4.7 
Southeast 
-20.4 
-4.8 
-1.4 
South 
-20.9 
-17.4 
-10.9 
Average 
-16.6 
-8.3 
-6.3 

• maintain or enhance soil productivity through
balanced use of mineral fertilizers combined with
organic and biological sources of plant nutrients;
• improve the stock of plant nutrients in the soil; and
• improve the efficiency of plant nutrients, thus
limiting losses to the environment.
IPNM offers great potential, therefore, in terms of:
• saving of resources;
• environment protection; and
• economic cropping.
Components
Soil, mineral fertilizers, organic matter and atmospheric
nitrogen, fixed by microorganisms or carried down in
precipitation, are the major sources of plant nutrients.
The natural plant nutrients found in the soil are deposited
from the air or water, through nitrogen fixation and the
weathering of soil mineral particles. Vegetation consumes
a proportion of these nutrients; some are geographically
redistributed by runoff; and some are lost by volatilization,
fixation and leaching. Farmers harvest the natural supply
of these nutrients for their crops and reorganize their
distribution in space and time through their production
systems.
Soil resources
Soils contain natural reserves of plant nutrients in
quantities that depend on soil composition and the stage
of weathering. These reserves are often in forms which
are unavailable to plants and only a small portion is
released each year through biological activity or chemical
processes. This release is much too slow to compensate
for the removal of nutrients from agricultural production,
especially in the humid tropics where soils are strongly
weathered. The quantities (or stock) of plant nutrients
available for a crop are determined by:
• the supply of nutrients to the crop from internal and
external sources;
• the uptake of nutrients by the crop; and
• losses of plant nutrient to the environment.
To enhance the soil nutrient supply, it is necessary to
reduce nutrient loss by suitable soil management
practices: improving problem soils to mobilize availability
of nutrients and adopting appropriate crop varieties,
cultural practices and cropping systems to maximize the
utilization of available nutrients.
Organic resources
Organic manures are valuable by-products of farming and
allied industries, derived from plant and animal sources.
Available organic resources include farmyard manure and
animal droppings, crop waste and residue, sewage sludge
and other human waste, as well as various forms of
industrial waste. Improvements in the use of organic
nutrient sources can be sought through enhanced and
improved organic recycling and better product quality.
Organic nutrient resources are not only an effective means
of supplementing nutrient availability, but they also
improve the bio-physico properties of the soil, enhance
fertilizer-use efficiency and are beneficial to the environ-
ment.
The following composting method is promoted in
Ecuador within the framework of the FAO Special
Programme for Food Security (TCP/ECU/8922).
• Materials:
– animal manure: from cows, pigs, poultry, horses,
donkeys, ducks etc.
– crop residues and weeds: maize, bean, faba bean,
groundnut, coffee and weeds
– others: industrial waste, ash and phosphate rock
– wood cuttings
– top soil from the forest or from an uncultivated
or sparingly cultivated area
– fresh water
• Layers:
– 1 layer of crop residues (20 cm)
– 1 layer of top soil (2 cm)
– 1 layer of manure (5-10 cm)
– ash or phosphate rock (50 g spread per m2)
– fresh water (sprinkled)
Repeat the above steps until a height of about 1-
1.2 m is reached. It is recommended to first construct
a lattice of old branches, positioning two or three
wood cuttings vertically in order to facilitate
ventilation. An appropriate size for the heap is
2 × 1-1.2 × 1-1.2 m.
• Water: Once a week, water must be added to the
heap, but not in excess in order to avoid the leaching
of nutrients.
• Air: After 3 weeks, the heap must be mixed to
ensure that all materials reach the centre.

• Temperature: During the process, the temperature
rises to 60°-70°C and most weed seeds and
pathogens are killed. The ideal temperature is 60°C.
• Duration: 2-3 months.
Biological resources
Legumes contribute to soil fertility directly through their
unique ability – in association with Rhizobia – to fix
atmospheric nitrogen. There are good prospects for
enhancing exploitation of biological resources, i.e.
Rhizobium-legume symbiosis and other associations such
as Blue-green algae, Azolla, Actinomycetes, Azotobacter
and Azospirillum in rice-based cropping systems.
Rhizobium-legume associations are by far the most
important sources of fixed N. Average N fixation rates
are around 100 kg/N/ha/year, but levels of 200 kg can be
obtained by adequate selection of Rhizobium strains.
On non-irrigated cultivated land, grain legumes are
essentially considered, such as cowpea, groundnut, bean,
chickpea, green gram, lentil and pigeon-pea. N2-fixing
cyanobacteria make a significant contribution to paddy
rice growing systems. Sesbania, a leguminous tree grown
in rice fields as green manure, can fix up to 500 kg N/ha/
year. The most commonly used in rice cultivation is the
Azolla-Anabaena association. This association fixes N
in the order of 100-200 kg/ha/year.
Mineral fertilizer resources
The role of mineral fertilizers in plant nutrition for
sustaining and increasing agricultural production is well
recognized. In order to further improve fertilizer-use
efficiency, reduce losses to the environment and promote
the judicious use of mineral plant nutrient sources, the
integrated plant nutrition systems (IPNS) approach aims
to:
• provide recommendations for a cropping system
rather than a single crop in the system;
• improve all the production factors and eliminate
limiting factors, including secondary and micro-
nutrients; and
• minimize nutrient losses in the field through
appropriate timing and methods of application.
Operational approach
A simplified operational approach is as follows:
• Carry out a benchmark survey to assess actual
availability of farm residues and other organic
sources which are not appropriately used at present
and could be used effectively for agricultural
production.
• Select major multiple cropping systems (including
one grain or forage legume) – depending on agro-
ecological conditions, produce markets, dietary
preferences etc.
• Follow appropriate soil management and conser-
vation practices, including improvement of problem
soils and crop management practices.
• Schedule nutrient application rates, including
secondary and micronutrients for the cropping
system as a whole.
• Apply N, P, K and micronutrients to the crop which
makes best use of the nutrient in question; the
following crop benefits from the residual effect.
• Use all available organic materials for the farm
lands; establish programmes for quick-growing trees
for fuel wood on common lands and along the
borders of farms, thereby reducing dependence on
cattle dung for fuel; install biogas plants where
appropriate.
• Adopt suitable technologies for good quality
compost production from easily available farm or
agricultural wastes and other organic sources; apply
compost and farmyard manure (FYM) in the most
appropriate season.
• Where appropriate, practise alley-cropping or green
manuring or introduce a legume crop (grain or
fodder) in the cropping system, inoculating, if
necessary, with efficient Rhizobium strains.
• Introduce effective strains of Azolla and blue-green
algae in rice-based cropping systems in appropriate
agro-ecological situations.
• Assess nutrients supplied through organic sources
and apply the balance of the recommended dose
through mineral fertilizers, taking into account a
15 percent increase in efficiency of the mineral
fertilizers due to the complementary effects of the
organic sources and mineral fertilizers.
• Monitor soil nutrient status against crop yield
performance and make any necessary adjustments
to the fertilizer schedule.
• Perform an economic evaluation of the integrated
system.
The precise model for each country depends on the agro-
ecological conditions, cropping systems and available
plant nutrient resources, as well as the infrastructural,

organizational, research and development support
available.
Long-term experimental results
The sustainability of the rice cropping system is important
for food security. Intensive cropping with no return of
crop residues and other organic inputs results in loss of
soil organic matter (SOM) and nutrient supply and is
assumed to be non-sustainable. Seven treatments
comprising various combinations of green manure (GM;
Sesbania cannabina L.), wheat straw (WS), FYM and
urea were applied to study the effects on yield and yield
trend, P and K balance, and soil fertility, as part of a rice-
wheat experiment (1988-2000) on loamy sand in Punjab,
India (Table 5).
Rice yields were comparable with GM + urea, WS +
GM + urea, and urea alone, but yields were reduced when
FYM was supplemented with N. With the exception of
one year, the integrated use of FYM and GM produced
rice yields which were equal to or higher than with other
GM-based treatments. WS incorporation reduced average
rice yields by 7 percent compared with WS removal. After
5 years of continuous application, FYM and WS were
on a par in terms of increasing rice yields. Organic
materials applied to rice had no residual effect on wheat
yield, with the exception of FYM, which increased yield
by about 6 percent compared with urea alone. Rice yield
declined by 0.02 to 0.13 tonnes/ha per year, but wheat
yields remained unchanged. Soil carbon increased with
the application of WS and FYM. Potassium balance was
highly negative. Although the causes of yield decline are
unknown, inadequate K application and changes in the
climatic parameters are possible reasons.
Apparent nutrient balance
The apparent P balance at system level was negative in
all treatments except for those containing FYM. The P
balance in T1 (control, 0N) was near zero because of
less P removal by rice. The negative P balance in T2 (urea-
N, 150 kg N/ha) averaged 10.4 kg P/ha/year), suggesting
that the current fertilizer P recommendations are not
adequate for maintaining long-term soil-supplying
capacity.
The apparent K balance was negative in all treatments.
The average K balance ranged from -78 kg in the control
(T1) to -151 kg K/ha/year in urea N (T2). When WS or
FYM was recycled (T4-T7), the K balance was still
negative, although less so. Despite substantial inputs from
irrigation water, the K balance was negative. The total K
uptake by the rice-wheat system averaged 285 kg K/ha/
year in T2, which is maintained at a relatively high rate
of K uptake, despite the application of insufficient
TABLE 5
Long-term effects of organic and inorganic fertilizers on grain yield of rice and wheat
 
Treatment number a 
Year 
T1 
T2 
T3 
T4 
T5 
T6 
T7 
 
Rice grain yield (tonnes/ha) b 

3.97 e 
6.29 bc 
6.56 b 
6.24 cd 
6.94 a 
5.81 d 
7.05 a 

4.64 b 
6.57 a 
6.48 a 
6.40 a 
6.56 a 
6.30 a 
6.70 a 

3.67 d 
6.19 a 
6.15 a 
5.65 b 
6.35 a 
4.60 c 
6.10 a 

4.23 d 
6.49 b 
6.47 b 
6.28 b 
6.66 ab 
5.72 c 
6.90 a 

4.10 d 
5.70 b 
5.80 b 
5.20 c 
5.60 b 
6.04 c 
6.50 a 

3.44 d 
5.59 b 
5.54 b 
4.82 c 
5.50 b 
4.80 c 
6.10 a 

2.79 b 
4.08 a 
3.92 a 
3.93 a 
3.92 a 
3.93 a 
4.04 a 

2.64 d 
5.20 ab 
5.50 a 
4.60 c 
5.34 a 
4.63 c 
4.94 b 

3.90 d 
5.52 a 
5.30 ab 
5.00 bc 
5.23 abc 
4.83 c 
5.64 a 

4.36 b 
6.64 a 
6.25 a 
6.32 a 
6.57 a 
6.38 c 
6.59 a 

3.97 d 
5.02 bc 
5.05 abc 
5.06 abc 
5.24 ab 
4.90 c 
5.35 a 

4.02 c 
5.54 b 
5.42 b 
5.16 b 
5.26 b 
5.17 b 
5.98 a 
 
Mean wheat grain yield (tonnes/ha) b 
1988-2000 
4.37 bc 
4.41 bc 
4.41 bc 
4.32 c 
4.44 b 
4.65 a 
4.71 a 
a T1 - control, 0N; T2 - urea-N, 150 kg N/ha; T3 - GM + urea-N (total N additions in T3, T5 and T6 were adjusted to 150 kg N/ha
with urea); T4 - WS + urea-N; T5 - WS + GM + urea-N; T6 - FYM + urea-N; T7 - FYM + GM (no inorganic N was applied to T7).
b Values within each row followed by the same letter do not differ significantly (P < 0.05) by Duncan’s multiple range test.
Source: Singh et al., 2004.

amounts of K. However, the large negative K balance
suggests that the system will not be able to sustain the K
supply in the long term. The major fraction of K uptake,
however, remains in rice straw; thus, recycling of straw
will dramatically change the K balance, keeping it within
reasonable limits.
Example of a project in Bolivia
Project GCPF/BOL/018/NET, “Soil management and
plant nutrition in farming systems – Fertisuelos”, became
operational in July 1987. The main activities were:
• Promotion of the correct use of mineral fertilizers
based on soil analysis and trials and demonstrations
conducted in farmers’ fields with potatoes, maize,
rice and wheat.
• Development of a capitalization process at farm
level based on the use of agricultural inputs made
available on a seasonal credit basis.
• Training of farmers and extension agents.
In addition to these activities, the project focused on the
identification of the limiting factors responsible for the
low yields of food crops in the three cropping zones of
the country, i.e. the highands, the valleys and the lowlands.
Since then, a new set of technical innovations has been
tested through a network of demonstration farms
emphasizing:
• more rational management of manure and other
recyclable organic residues;
• higher fodder production from pastures and use of
fallow land, and corresponding improvement of soil
fertility; and
• improvement of cultivation practices, e.g. land
preparation to increase soil water reserves, plant
density, weed control and erosion control.
The project established that significant increases in crop
yields can be obtained through the application of the
recommended technical packages. Potato yields improved
from 12 tonnes/ha (mineral fertilizer plots) to 22.8 tonnes/
ha (IPNS plots). Similarly, maize yields improved from
3.6 to 4.9 tonnes/ha and rice from 3.0 to 5.6 tonnes/ha.
The advances made in the management of manure and
the results of organomineral fertilization revealed the
possibilities of recycling local sources of organic matter
in a more efficient manner.
In rice, the effects of organomineral fertilizer and plant
density were tested. The treatments are shown in Table 6.
With 30-30 + 5 tonnes/ha manure, farmers’ plot yield
was 2-3 tonnes/ha, while yield in the plots with adequate
density of 260 pl/m2 was 5-6 tonnes/ha.
The project successfully demonstrated that, with
correct utilization of organic resources, it is possible to:
• conserve the soil fertility;
• make agricultural production more sustainable; and
• minimize the costs and economic risks associated
with high dosage of fertilizers.
Extending IPNM for wider adoption
Farmers should be motivated to make optimum use of
organic, inorganic and biological fertilizers. They need
to be made aware of their nutrient-supplying potential
and the resulting physico-chemical and biological benefits
for the soil, with enhanced productivity.
Departments of agricultural extension, private
enterprises and NGOs (non-governmental organizations),
together with research and educational institutes, have a
vital role to play in the promotion of IPNM practices to
farmers. Efforts should focus on creating awareness and
expertise in farmers in the efficient use of those fertilizers,
locally-available organic manures and biofertilizers which
are most suitable to the needs of the area and the cropping
systems as a whole.
In order to promote adoption of the technology, a
programme could be set up to establish knowledgeable
groups of farmers who have been trained in appropriate
IPNM techniques, and who have the necessary potential
to transmit expertise to fellow farmers. One possible
means of achieving this is the organization of farmer field
schools (FFS).
For the effective implementation of improved
agricultural practices, adopting a holistic approach,
extension workers must be effective and innovative
managers. Farmers require exposure to improved
TABLE 6
Treatments
 
N-P2O5 
+ 
Manure 
(tonnes/ha) 
Plant density 
(pl/m2) 
 
15-15 
+ 

30-30 
+ 

60-60 
+ 

Control: 
Farmer's plot without fertilizer 

technology and practical training; they must be adaptable
and capable of organization with the collaborative efforts
of research and extension services.
Coordination of the efforts of all agencies and
institutions would lead to speedy and effective imple-
mentation of the programme. National governments have
the role of central coordinating agency.
CONCLUSION
There are good possibilities for closing the yield gap
in irrigated rice in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Suboptimal nutrient supply has been identified as one of
the major reasons for the yield gap. Integrated plant
nutrition for rice-based cropping systems ensuring
optimum and efficient use of organic, mineral and
bionutrient resources could, therefore, be an effective
instrument for closing the rice yield gap. It is also
important that nutrient balances in rice-based cropping
systems are established.
FAOSTAT. FAO Statistical Database (available at www.
fao.org/faostat/).
PPIC. 2004. Research Database, PPI/PPIC and FAR
(available at www.ppi-ppic.org/far/farguide.nsf).
Pulver, E.L., Tran, D.V. & Nguyen, V.N. 2000. Yield gap
in irrigated rice in Latin American and Caribbean. In Proc.
of the Expert Consultation on Yield Gap and Productivity
Decline in Rice Production, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Singh, Y., Singh, B., Ladha, J.K., Khind, C.S., Gupta,
R.K., Meelu, O.P. & Pasuquin, E. 2004. Long-term
effects of organic inputs on yield and soil fertility in the
rice-wheat rotation. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 68: 845-853.
Yamada, T. & Lopes, A.S. 1999. Balanço de nutrientes na
agricultura Brasileira. In J.O. Siqueira, F.M.S. Moreira,
A.S. Lopes, L.R.G., Guilherme, V. Faquin, A.E. Furtini
& J.G. Carvalho, eds. Inter-relaçâo fertilidade, biologia
do solo e nutriçâo de plantas, p. 143-161. UFLA/DCS,
Viçosa, Brazil, SBCS, Lavras.
Incidence de la gestion intégrée des fertilisants sur la production durable de riz,
en particulier dans les pays d’Amérique latine
production durable de riz qui requiert
une gestion intégrée de toutes les
ressources disponibles en nutriments:
sols, matières organiques, minéraux et
engrais biologiques. La gestion
intégrée des nutriments assure le
maintien et parfois même
l’amélioration de la fertilité du sol par
une utilisation équilibrée et adaptée
des engrais minéraux associée à des
apports organiques et biologiques, qui
se traduit par une meilleure efficience
des éléments nutritifs, une
productivité accrue des cultures et
une réduction des pertes en éléments
nutritifs affectant l’environnement.
Les systèmes de culture reposant
sur le riz permettent de tirer parti de
manière idéale de la gestion intégrée
des nutriments. La fixation
biologique de l’azote (FBA) par une
algue vert-bleu dans les eaux de
décrue et par une bactérie
hétérotrophique dans les zones
radicalaires du riz peuvent contribuer
de manière significative à l’équilibre
en azote Les apports organiques en
azote, comme le fumier et l’engrais
vert peuvent être utilisés de manière
efficace en association avec des
engrais minéraux. Il est également
possible d’accroître les quantités
d’azote par le biais de l’azolla,
malgré certaines contraintes, comme
l’augmentation des coûts de main-
d’œuvre.
La gestion intégrée des nutriments
a permis d’obtenir, dans certaines
parties du monde, des résultats
encourageants pour la production
rizicole. Les expériences menées
dans certains pays en vue de soutenir
la production rizicole par le recours à
la gestion intégrée des nutriments
sont présentées dans le présent
article.
Le riz irrigué et les systèmes
privilégiés de culture pluviale
représentent approximativement 70
pour cent de la production totale de
riz en Amérique latine et dans les
Caraïbes. L’adoption de génotypes à
rendement élevé est importante dans
la région. Cela dit, les rendements
obtenus dans les exploitations restent
bien inférieurs au potentiel de
rendement. L’écart de rendement est
évident dans les systèmes de
production du riz irrigué. Si l’on
réduit cet écart il sera possible de
renforcer de manière très nette la
sécurité alimentaire dans les pays
d’Amérique latine et des Caraïbes.
La mauvaise fertilisation des
cultures explique en grande partie les
écarts de rendement. Une
amélioration de la gestion des
fertilisants aura donc des
répercussions importantes sur la

La producción en régimen de regadío
y los sistemas de tierras altas más
favorecidos representan en la
actualidad cerca del 70 % del total de
la producción de arroz en América
Latina y el Caribe. Los genotipos de
alto rendimiento tienen una cobertura
importante en la región, pero los
rendimientos de los agricultores
siguen estando muy por debajo del
potencial de rendimiento de los
cultivos. La brecha de rendimientos
resulta evidente en los sistemas de
producción de arroz en régimen de
regadío, por lo que salvar esta brecha
se presenta como la oportunidad más
prometedora de reforzar la seguridad
alimentaria en América Latina y el
Caribe.
La nutrición inadecuada de los
cultivos constituye uno de los
motivos principales de la brecha de
rendimientos. Mejorar la gestión de
los nutrientes de cultivos tendrá una
repercusión importante en la
producción sostenible del arroz, para
la cual se requiere la gestión
integrada de todos los recursos de
nutrientes disponibles, es decir, el
suelo, los productos orgánicos, los
minerales y los biofertilizantes. La
gestión integrada de nutrientes
garantiza el mantenimiento y la
posible mejora de la fertilidad del
suelo gracias a la utilización
equilibrada y prudente de fertilizantes
minerales combinados con fuentes
orgánicas y biológicas, lo cual se
traduce en una mejora de la eficacia
de los nutrientes, el incremento de la
productividad de los cultivos y la
reducción al mínimo de las pérdidas
de nutrientes al medio ambiente.
Los sistemas de cultivos basados
en el arroz ofrecen una oportunidad
ideal para extraer beneficios de la
gestión integrada de nutrientes. La
fijación biológica del nitrógeno
natural a través de algas verde-
azuladas en aguas de inundación y
mediante bacterias heterótrofas en la
zona de raíz del arroz puede suponer
una importante aportación al balance
del nitrógeno. Las fuentes orgánicas
de nitrógeno, como el estiércol de
granja y el abono verde de legumbre,
pueden utilizarse de forma eficaz
como insumos de nitrógeno junto con
el nitrógeno de los fertilizantes
minerales. También cabe la
posibilidad de complementar las
necesidades de nitrógeno mediante la
azolla, pese a presentar algunas
limitaciones, como los costos
adicionales de mano de obra.
Las prácticas de gestión integrada
de nutrientes en determinadas partes
del mundo han revelado resultados
alentadores en relación con la
producción del arroz. Aquí se
muestran las experiencias de algunos
países en el sostenimiento de la
producción del arroz a través de la
aplicación de prácticas de gestión
integrada de nutrientes.
Repercusiones de la gestión integrada de nutrientes en la producción sostenible del arroz
con referencia especial a los países de América Latina

Rice is the staple food with the highest level of consump-
tion in the world and the third highest production after
wheat and maize. Ninety percent of global rice production
occurs in tropical and subtropical Asian countries. In
several countries of Africa, Latin America and the
Caribbean, rice is a major staple and is produced in
considerable quantities. It is estimated that by 2025,
10 billion people will depend on rice as a principal food
and demand will reach 880 million tonnes. The rice sector
is an important part of the economy in many Asian
countries, providing employment and contributing to the
gross domestic product (GDP).
Nevertheless, the evolution of the price of paddy rice
in recent years has not been particularly advantageous
for small farmers. Higher paddy prices have motivated
rice-producing developing countries to create oppor-
tunities for adding value to traditional milled rice and its
by-products. The Agricultural and Food Engineering
Technologies Service (AGST) of FAO has a mandate to
support such activities; in addition to technical support
and organization, funding support is required to improve
the development of small rice enterprises.
The International Rice Commission (IRC) comprises
61 member countries. Its international conference,
organized every 4 years, is an important event for
members to share recent experiences related to rice
production and post-production.
Asian rice farmers traditionally use wholegrain rice
and its by-products at artisan level. This experience could
be shared with other countries and used as a basis to
promote development of the agro-industry sector. Some
governments and research institutions have carried out
activities and developed strategies to promote small
industry through the integral and efficient use of paddy
rice. In recent years, AGST-FAO has prepared technical
reports on this subject, identifying ways to strengthen the
small rice industry sector:
The use of high-yielding varieties (HYVs) presents
new challenges in terms of infrastructure development,
and also in terms of innovative technologies for adding
value to rice and its by-products (a good source of
employment and income generation).
The establishment of viable agroprocessing enterprises
in rural areas producing rice is crucial, not only in Asia
but in other developing countries of Africa and Latin
America; investment in technologies that are affordable
and add quality and commercial value to rice products
and by-products will enhance the demand for farm
produce.
The revision of whole grain rice utilization is important
for promoting the small rice industry (rice by-products
are currently under-used, resulting in problems of
handling and pollution).
BACKGROUND
Carbohydrate demand declines as income increases;
likewise, if income is low, the demand for rice increases.
For some Asian countries, the decline in rice consumption
is a matter for concern, since it is the traditional staple
food and a major source of energy, protein, thiamine (B1),
riboflavin (B2), niacin, iron and calcium (Hadiwigeno,
1997). The negative trend of rice consumption is partly
due to an improvement in living standards. There is,
therefore, a risk that rice may develop a negative image
and be perceived as food for the poor. The changes in
food consumption patterns depend on three major factors:
• taste and preference (especially for protein foods);
• income; and
• price of rice in relation to price of substitutes.
In the face of a decline in boiled rice consumption as
living standards improve, some food research institutions
have been modernizing the processes related to rice food,
to promote consumption of new, improved rice products
and convenience rice foods (Hadiwigeno, 1997).
The total production of paddy or rough rice was around
615 million tonnes in 2005. About 365 million tonnes of
milled rice are produced in developing countries and
Using wholegrain rice to promote small and
medium enterprises (SMEs)
D. Mejía L.
Officer, Agricultural and Food Engineering Technologies, FAO, Rome, Italy

18 million tonnes in developed countries (Table 1). In
addition to the milled rice derived from the main
processed product, there is also a large volume of by-
products, including the husk, bran and broken grains.
Therefore, small rice farmers could benefit from useful
technologies for rice products and by-products. Efficient
technologies can enhance quality and safety in milling
rice processing and offer great potential in terms of the
utilization of by-products. In both cases, there is added
value which increases returns. Strengthening the rice
small industry sector is in line with the Millennium
Development Goals (MDG) which aim to reduce extreme
poverty and eradicate hunger in poor countries.
It is important to apply modern or innovative
processing technologies to traditional rice products. This
applies in particular to those countries which have entered
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and
must upgrade the uniformity, quality and shelf-life of the
product and comply with various requirements (e.g.
specification of ingredients). Therefore, the improvement
of rice-processing small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
– whether for rice products or by-products – is a matter
of great importance within FAO’s Technical Cooperation
Programme, and specifically within AGST.
The main approach is to enhance capacity-building for
rice in developing countries by facilitating the interchange
and transfer of technologies to add value and create
opportunities for income generation and employment
among farmers or people associated with these activities
within the food chain of rice and rice by-products. The
appropriate technical use of paddy rice should be seen as
an important action to be carried out by rice farmers and
agroprocessors to convert it into an efficient and profitable
business through implementation of cost-effective and
environmentally friendly methods and technologies. In
some countries (e.g. Indonesia), small-scale rice industry
development has had a significant impact on the GDP,
resulting in the reduction of poverty to some extent. Thus,
the promotion of the small-scale food industry is a helpful
alternative to be exploited in developing countries in order
to improve the rice agricultural sector socio-economically.
Although the small-scale food industry – like any other
small enterprise – cannot increase the per caput income
very rapidly, it can open up more job opportunities than
medium or large-scale industries; this is clearly
demonstrated in Indonesia, where rice milling is the most
important small-scale food processing industry
(Damardjati, 1995).
Many rice-producing countries are poor and need to
develop national strategies to enhance the capacity for
improving the efficiency of technologies used to add value
to rice and its by-products. In this regard, small and
medium rice agro-industry development represents a
valuable alternative, not only for the small and medium
rice producer but for others interested in using rice in a
more integral and efficient manner.
WHOLEGRAIN RICE STRUCTURE, PROPERTIES AND
COMPOSITION
Freshly harvested rice is called paddy grain or rough rice.
The pearly white grain used for cooking is the centre of
the rice seed and it is covered and protected by the husk
TABLE 1
Paddy rice world production and milled rice, utilization, export and import
Milled paddy rice 
(tonnes) 
Region 
Rough rice production 
(tonnes) 
Rice milled equivalent-
domestic supply (2003) 
Export 
(2004) 
Import 
(2004) 
Developing countries 
589 390 422 
364 783 250 
21 689 813 
16 602 715 
Latin America and 
Caribbean 
 
26 370 717 
 
16 753 623 
 
533 866 
 
1 242 881 
Africa 
18 565 960 
19 326 043 
828 569 
5 807 222 
Near East 
10 830 748 
10 558 944 
964 002 
4 810 867 
Far East 
539 820 645 
322 461 872 
20 176 024 
5 460 446 
Developed countries 
25 264 473 
17 756 051 
2 596 464 
3 169 513 
United States of America 
10 012 190 
3 976 280 
1 675 042 
447 728 
Europe 
3 235 900 
3 872 178 
1 454 778 
838 960 
Japan 
10 989 000 
7 969 912 
- 
- 
Total for Asia 
556 018 828 
337 799 621 
20 385 158 
10 225 470 
World 
614 654 895 
382 539 301 
24 286 277 
19 772 228 
Source: Yap, 1995 (adapted); FAOSTAT, 2006.

or hull which is composed of the palea, lemma and sterile
glumes. Inside the husk, the familiar white grain is
covered by a layer called bran. The embryo, a small
structure at the base of the grain, is also contained within
the bran layer. Together, the grain, embryo and bran are
called brown rice (Figure 1).
Rough or paddy rice consists of an outer protective
layer covering the husk (17-20 percent), the bran (10-
13 percent) and the white rice (70-71 percent). Paddy rice
is the whole grain as taken off the plant at harvesting; the
white rice grain which is eaten accounts for less than
three-quarters of the weight of a paddy rice grain which
also includes the hull and bran (Figure 2). The palea,
lemma and sterile glumes are removed from paddy rice
in the first stage of the milling process, called de-hulling.
Machines rub off the bran and embryo to leave polished
rice or white rice. A polished rice grain contains approx-
imately 94 percent starch and 5 percent protein.
Rice is the staple food in at least 17 countries in Asia
and the Pacific, nine countries in North, Central and South
America and the Caribbean, one country in North Africa
and seven countries in sub-Saharan Africa (FAO, 2004).
In developing countries, rice accounts for 715 kcal/caput/
day, providing 27 percent of the dietary energy supply,
20 percent of dietary protein and 3 percent of dietary fat.
The brown rice is the edible part of the rice grain. Levels
of dietary fibre, minerals and B vitamins are highest in
the bran and lowest in the aleurone layers. Rice is a good
source of B vitamins (thiamine, riboflavin and niacin),
but contains little or no vitamins C, D or beta-carotene
(precursor of vitamin A) (Kennedy, Burlingame and
Nguyen, 2002). The amino acid profile of rice is high in
glutamic and aspartic acids, but low in lysine (Juliano,
1997). The anti-nutritional factors, most of which are
concentrated in the bran, are phytate, trypsin inhibitor,
oryzacystatin and haemagglutinin-lectin. The availability
of iron and zinc in typical Asian rice diets is generally
low: they come mainly from plant sources, and rice and
legumes contain phytate which binds minerals and
proteins including enzymes (Calloway, 1995). Table 2
shows the composition of rice and its edible fraction.
In recent years, in some countries (e.g. Japan), rice
bran has been associated with good health, thanks to
several active components, including: rice bran oil
(reduces cholesterol), γ-Oryzanol and Ferulic acid
(antioxidants), Inositol (for liver function and healthy hair)
and sterols (for cholesterol metabolism). These
components offer potential in both the food and the
cosmetic industry (Tsuno-Co., 2004). Moreover, the
hypocholesterolaemic effects of stabilized rice bran
reduce plasma cholesterol due to the presence of a
unsaponificable fraction and the effect of rice bran hemi
cellulose (Suzuki et al., 1962).
FIGURE 1
Rice grain section showing protective layers
Source: RIRDC, 2003.
FIGURE 2
Paddy rice components
Source: RIRDC, 2003.

POST-HARVESTING OF RICE ASSOCIATED WITH
QUALITY
During post-harvest operations related to rice, an efficient
on-farm handling, storage, processing and distribution
system is essential to ensure acceptable quality and safety
of the grain. Environmental conditions during grain
ripening and drying in the field may affect the processing
characteristics of the rice grain (Juliano, 1996). Early-
maturing (90-100 days) tends to be more immature than
medium-maturing rice (130-140 days). Immature grains
reduce head rice yield and result in completely chalky
grains. Thinner grains also tend to have lower amounts
of brown rice and total and head-milled rice than normal
grains (Wadsworth and Hayes, 1991). Drying is the most
critical post-harvest operation, particularly in the wet
season, for maintaining the quality of the rice grain
(Juliano, 1996). Aflatoxin is produced mainly in the bran
polish fraction of brown rice (Ilag and Juliano, 1982).
During post-harvest operations, numerous factors can
affect quality:
• Stack-burning (yellowing) occurs when wet grain,
particularly unthreshed grain, is piled without any
provision for ventilation. Microbial respiration of
the thermophilic fungi may heat the rice to over 60°C
(Phillips et al., 1988). The resulting milled rice
becomes hard, translucent and yellow, regardless of
variety, due to the effects of heating rather than direct
microbial infestation. Yellowing reduces the lysine
TABLE 2
Composition per 100 g of rough rice and its edible fraction
Nutrient 
(in 100 g) 
Rough rice 
Brown rice 
Milled rice 
Rice bran 
Rice hull 
Moisture 

Protein (g) 
5.5-7.7 
7.1-8.3 
6.3-7.1 
11.3-14.9 
2.0-2.8 
Fat (g) 
1.5-2.3 
1.6-2.8 
0.3-0.5 
15-29.7 
0.3-0.8 
Ash (g) 
2.9-5.2 
1.0-1.5 
0.3-0.8 
6.6-9.9 
13.2-21 
Crude fibre (g) 
7.2-10.4 
0.6-1.0 
0.2-0.5 
7-11.4 
34.5-45.9 
Dietary fibre (g) 
16.4-19.2 
2.9-3.9 
0.7-2.3 
24-29 
66-74 
CHOS (g) 
64-73 
73-87 
77-89 
34-62 
22-34 
(Kcal) 

363-385 
349-373 
394-476 
265-332 
Lysine (g/16g N) 
3.1-4.7 
3.7-4.1 
3.2-4.0 
4.8-5.4 
3.8-5.4 
Thiamine (mg) 
0.26-0.33 
0.29-0.61 
0.02-0.11 
1.20-2.40 
0.09-0.21 
Riboflavin (mg) 
0.06-0.11 
0.04-0.14 
0.02-0.06 
0.18-0.43 
0.05-0.07 
Niacin (mg) 
2.9-5.6 
3.5-5.3 
1.3-2.4 
26.7-49.9 
1.6-4.2 
Calcium (mg) 
10-80 
10-50 
10-30 
30-120 
60-130 
Phosphorus (mg) 
0.17-0.39 
0.17-0.43 
0.08-0.15 
1.1-2.5 
0.03-0.07 
Iron (mg) 
1.4 - 6.0 
0.2-5.2 
0.2-2.8 
8.6-43 
3.9-9.5 
Zinc (mg) 
1.7-3.1 
0.6-2.8 
0.6-2.3 
4.3-25.8 
0.9--4.0 
Density (g/cm3 ) 
1.17-1.23 
1.31 
1.44-1.46 
1.16-1.29 
0.67-0.74 
Bulk density (g/cm3 ) 
0.56-0.64 
0.68 
0.78-0.85 
0.20-0.40 
0.10-0.16 
Source: Juliano, 1985.
content of rice by about 10 percent, resulting in a
drop in net protein utilization (Eggum et al., 1984).
• Rice hull tightness provides better protection for
the brown rice from infestation by insects and
microorganisms. Parboiled rice usually has a loose
hull as a result of starch gelatinization and swelling
(Juliano, 1997).
• Grain breakage during milling is caused by the
preformed fissures in brown rice which result from
moisture absorption stress during storage and
milling (Kunze, 1985). The critical moisture content
is that below which grain fissure is 15-16 percent
for susceptible rice and 12-14 percent for resistant
varieties (Juliano and Perez, 1993). Immature grains
become small, thin and chalky broken. Chalky
portions of rice with high amylose content in the
endosperm are subject to grain breakage because
of the presence of air space and the loose
arrangement of the cell contents.
• Ageing occurs during the first 3-4 months after
harvest in rough, brown or milled rice at temp-
eratures above 15°C, when the endosperm:
– becomes harder, resulting in higher total and
head-milled rice yields and more volume
expansion and water absorption during cooking
(with fewer solids in cooking gruel);
– becomes slightly yellow; and
– loses its aroma.

• Shelf life – due to damaged aleurone cells, milled
rice and brown rice also experience fat rancidity as
a result of lipase action on fat to produce free fatty
acids and the oxidation of the released unsaturated
fatty acids by the action of lipoxygenase. The major
carbonyl compound produced is hexanal, detectable
by Japanese consumers 1 month after milling. Fresh,
well-milled rice is, therefore, the preferred raw
material for processed rice products because there
is a lower content of surface fat subject to rancidity.
Shelf-life is longest for rough rice, followed by
brown rice; it is shortest for milled rice. Thermally-
processed rice products are more stable and tend
not to suffer from this type of oxidation.
De-hulling and milling of paddy rice
One of the main processing methods applied to paddy
rice is milling, and the efficiency of milling is calculated
as a percentage of the whole grain obtained after milling.
The main operations involved in paddy rice milling are:
• cleaning;
• de-husking or de-hulling to obtain brown rice;
• whitening of brown rice to obtain white rice; and
• polishing of white rice to finally obtain polished
white rice.
An efficient rice mill will produce more than 50 percent
head rice, 5-15 percent large brokens and 5-15 percent
small broken kernels. In the Engelberg or huller-type
mills, de-hulling and milling are done in a single step,
resulting in increased grain breakage and by-products
which are a mixture of hull and bran (IRRI, 2006).
The weight of the whole white grains left after milling
is calculated as a percentage of the total weight of the
paddy rice. Breakage of grain occurs during milling for
various reasons, including the presence of chalky or
opaque grains which are generally softer than translucent
grains and consequently prone to breakage during milling.
Parboiling increases the percentage of head rice because
it gelatinizes the starch in the grain, which results in firmer
grains after drying.
Two types of rice mill are generally used in developing
countries:
• Village mill, with three main outputs:
– milled rice (mixture of whole grains and large
and small brokens);
– husk; and
– bran.
• Commercial mill, with a multi-pass system
producing six outputs:
– head rice (the main product of grading);
– broken grains (a co-product of grading);
– brewer’s rice (a by-product of sifter);
– coarse bran (a by-product of first whitener);
– fine bran/meal (a by-product of second whitener/
polisher); and
– husk or hull (a by-product of husking).
Head rice is milled rice with a length greater or equal to
three-quarters of the average length of the whole kernel.
Head rice recovery varies from 25 to 65 percent in the
standard rice milling industry (IRRI, 2006).
Two major advances in rice milling are the humidifying
rice-milling machine and the rice moisture conditioner
for high-moisture milling (Satake, 1990). The brown rice
is humidified through pressurized water mist via a hollow
shaft. An additional 0.3 to 0.4 percent moisture then
softens the surface, resulting in: more efficient bran
removal (i.e. higher total and head-milled rice yields); a
2°C lower temperature rise; and minimum moisture loss.
More glossy milled rice is obtained and gelatinization of
surface starch during milling has been observed
(Kohlwey, 1992).
The rice milling industry can promote small and
medium agrobusinesses through improved quality control
of paddy rice and the milling process. Rice quality
improvement should be in line with consumer preferences
and affordability. Quality is not the only means for
promoting rice at national and international level in order
to obtain higher prices. Other potential niches for rice
milled products exist, for example organic rice and brown
rice:
• Organic certification requires special conditions for
production, but it opens up market opportunities.
• Brown rice (or husked rice) is minimally processed
and retains the bran layers with high nutritional
properties; it is recommended to apply parboiling
and vacuum and opaque packaging for increased
shelf-life.
PROCESSED RICE PRODUCTS
In developed countries, there is a high level of
consumption of processed rice products made mainly by
large rice-processing enterprises. Developing countries,
on the other hand, produce a smaller quantity of processed
rice products, and there is therefore a good opportunity

to promote the small rice industry. Processed rice products
include pre-cooked and quick-cooking rice, noodles, rice
cakes and pudding, expanded or puffed rice, baked rice
products, fermented rice, rice flour and starch, and are
derived from brown rice, milled rice, cooked rice, broken
rice, dry-milled flour and rice starch.
Precooked and quick-cooking rice
Precooked rice is used for rice-based convenience food
products. These are hermetically sealed in laminated
plastic or aluminium-laminated plastic pouches and
pasteurized at 120°C under pressure (Juliano and Sakurai,
1985). Before consumption, the aluminium-laminated
plastic pouch is warmed directly in hot water for 10 to
15 minutes; plastic pouches may be punctured and heated
in a microwave oven for 1 to 2 minutes.
Frozen cooked rice packed in airtight plastic pouches
has been in great demand in some countries (e.g. Japan).
Likewise, precooked frozen rice is also delivered to chain
restaurants, where it is heated in microwave ovens and
served. Deep-freezing without dehydration helps prevent
cooked rice from retrograding (hardening) (Juliano,
1997).
Other products can be made from precooked rice, for
example, dry precooked rice cereal: cereal slurry is
prepared, cooked, dried in a double-drum drier, flaked
and packaged.
Noodles
Flat and extruded round noodles are traditionally prepared
from wet-milled flour that has been ground with a stone
or metal mill. The starting material can be whole or broken
grains with low fat content. Freshly milled rather than
aged rice with a high amylose content is recommended.
To make flat rice noodles, a wet-milled rice batter with a
consistency of 42 percent rice by weight is placed on a
noodle-making machine (Juliano and Sakurai, 1985). In
Viet Nam, Thailand and Taiwan, rice paper and egg roll
wrapper are prepared from wet-milled high-amylose rice
batter.
Rice cakes and pudding
Rice cake is traditionally prepared from waxy milled rice
by washing the milled rice, steaming at 100°C for about
15 minutes to 40 percent moisture content, grinding and
kneading and then packing in plastic films; it is then
pasteurized for 20 minutes at 80°C and left to cool
(Juliano and Sakurai, 1985).
Japanese rice pudding consists of waxy rice flour,
cornstarch, sugar, water and flavouring mixed and
steamed at 100°C and served with sweet bean curd, green
tea, coffee, cherries and other fruits (Juliano and Sakurai,
1985). Another type of pudding is prepared by cooking
the rice in boiling water, straining and mixing it with milk
prior to completion of cooking. Egg yolk, sugar, vanilla
and light cream are amalgamated with a variety of fruit
combinations. Rice with sweet milk is very popular in
Latin America, where it is mixed with cinnamon and scent
nail and consumed warm or cold.
Expanded rice products
Puffed and popped rice are traditional breakfast cereals
and snack foods. Flaked or beaten brown rice and
parboiled milled rice may be converted into puffed rice
by heating in hot air or roasting in hot sand. With normal
parboiled milled rice, the puffed volume is directly
proportional to the intensity of the parboiling (Villarreal
and Juliano, 1987).
Continuous explosion-puffing of brown rice was
developed in Japan in 1971. The grains are dispersed in
a long heating pipe and conveyed by a high-velocity
stream of superheated steam (Sagara, 1988). After the
rice has been heated and dried in 3 to 10 seconds, it is
discharged into the atmosphere through a rotary valve
and explosion-puffing takes place. A brown rice
expansion ratio of 5.4 is obtained at 6 kg/cm2 pressure
and an outlet steam temperature of 200°C. The puffed
product has a starch digestibility of 94 percent after
15 minutes’ boiling.
Baked rice products
There has been progress in bread baking in Japan, using
a mixture of 10 to 20 percent rice flour and wheat flour,
depending on the gluten strength of the wheat flour (Tani,
1985). A mixture of 60 percent rice flour, 30 percent
wheat flour and 10 percent vital gluten has also produced
good results. Similar dilutions of wheat flour with rice
flour and other starchy flours have been developed for
bread-making in other countries. It is important that the
gelatinization temperature of the starch be low (<70°C)
(Bean and Nishita, 1985).
Fermented rice products
Waxy rice wines are prepared by fermenting steamed
waxy milled rice with fungi and a yeast starter (Juliano
and Sakurai, 1985). A sweet product is produced, which

is converted to alcohol as fermentation progresses. The
liquid is removed by decantation. Rice wine production
in Taiwan uses either Aspergillum oryzae or Rhizopus
sp. for saccharification (Chang, 1988).
Rice vinegar results from the completion of the rice
starch fermentation and is a traditional Japanese and
Chinese product (Iwasaki, 1987). Acetic acid fermentation
is carried out by mixing seed vinegar with rice wine and
takes 1 to 3 months. The product is ripened, filtered,
pasteurized and bottled (Lai, Chang and Luh, 1980).
Rice flours and starch
Rice flour can be made from both waxy and non-waxy
rices and from both raw and gelatinized rice. It is milled
by rolling, pounding, shock-milling, stone-milling,
milling in a lateral steel mill and wet-milling in a stone
mill.
Rice starch production involves mainly wet-milling of
brokens with 0.3 to 0.5 percent sodium hydroxide to
remove protein (Juliano, 1984). Broken grains are steeped
in alkaline solution for 24 hours, then wet-milled in pin
mills, hammer mills or stone-mill disintegrators with the
alkaline solution. The starch is used exclusively for human
consumption, largely for baby foods and also in extruded
noodles.
USE OF RICE BY-PRODUCTS
The main rice by-products from the rice milling process
are the bran, broken grains and hull. Rice by-products
are a renewable source of energy; they are carbon neutral
and can help reduce waste and the problems associated
with environmental contamination. Some processing
methods and potential agro-industries are briefly
described below.
Rice bran
Rice bran offers limited potential as food due to:
• the prevalence of small one-step milling machines
which incorporate significant quantities of hull in
the bran;
• the unhygienic conditions of the rice mill which
increase microbial contamination; and
• the inability to stabilize the bran resulting in a rancid
product.
The available literature, however, indicates a wide range
of uses for rice bran. Bran accounts for 5 to 8 percent of
the rough rice weight, while polish accounts for an
additional 2 to 3 percent. Yield is influenced by the type
of mill, the variety of rice and the pre-treatment (drying
or parboiling) (Juliano, 1997). Stabilization is essential,
considering the potential of rice bran oil for food
utilization.
Extruded rice bran
With extrusion cooking, the rice bran can be heat-treated
without interrupting the flow of the material since the
extrusion equipment can be integrated in the processing
line to produce stable rice bran. For example, an extruder
which treats 500 kg per hour at 12 to 13 percent moisture
content, cooking at 130°C and holding at 97° to 99°C
before cooling gives a product which is stable for at least
30 to 60 days (Randall et al., 1985). Other extruders exist
with similar conditions to stabilize the bran. The treated
bran should be put into a vacuum in opaque packaging
and stored in a cool place in order to increase shelf-life.
This type of product can be used for breakfast formulas.
Rice bran flour
Stable rice bran can be converted to flour; it has good
functional properties and can be used with other processed
foods, such as breakfast cereals and other products
prepared with flour materials. Wheat flour was replaced
at a level of 40 and 60 percent to make muffins which
were rated as acceptable (Hudson, Chui and Knuckles,
1992).
High protein bran flour
Given its hypoallergenic property, rice bran flour is a
potential source of protein for infants allergic to milk or
soy. The rice bran is de-fatted and sieved through a
100 mesh to obtain a light flour fraction containing 5 to
12 percent of crude fibre. Further grinding of the coarse-
sieved fine (<84 µm) fraction through a senior flour mill
and sieving produced flour containing 15 percent protein,
5-6 percent starch, 12-13 percent ash and 1-1.5 percent
fat (Houston and Mohammad, 1966).
Bran protein concentrate
There are several processing methods to obtain bran
protein. For example, in the alkali extraction process,
7.5 volumes of NaOH at pH 11 are mixed and 80 percent
protein is extracted from de-fatted bran for 1 hour at 25°C;
neutralization to pH 5.5 with hydrochloric acid produces
precipitation containing 40 percent protein, representing
50 percent of the total protein (Chen and Houston, 1970).

Bran protein isolate
A highly purified rice protein isolate (RPI) can be obtained
by heating rice bran in boiling water in the presence of a
commercial heat-resistant alpha amylase (Kiriyama and
Morita, 1992).
Feed
Traditionally, rice bran has been used for feed and in spite
of its high fibre content, it is a high energy feed. Rice
bran is more suitable for sheep and swine than cattle and
chicken (Crampton and Harris, 1969). In Viet Nam, fish
feed is made by mixing with a mass of cooked rice flour
(made from broken rice) and passing through a pellet mill.
Ethanol
Rice bran has been used as a medium for screening
Sacharomyces species for ethanol production. Shochu
(Japanese alcoholic beverage) distillery waste and
aromatic rice bran are used to make a fermented product
with a characteristic wine-like red colour containing about
12 percent ethanol (Teramoto et al., 1994).
Rice bran oil
Oil is one of the most important by-products obtained
from rice bran. The bran is about 20 percent oil with a
high free fatty acid content (Del Rosario, 1997).
Other products
Other rice bran products with industrial potential include
Inositol (a vitamin essential for babies), vitamin B
concentrate, Oryzanol (antioxidant), dietary fibres, phytic
acid (natural mineral chelater) and others (Del Rosario,
1997).
Broken rice grains
The rice industry trades two types of broken grains:
• Large brokens of length less than three-quarters but
more than one-quarter of the average length of the
whole kernel, representing 5 to 15 percent of the
total milled rice.
• Small brokens or “brewer rice” of length less than
one-quarter of the average length of the whole
kernel, representing 5 to 15 percent of the small
broken kernel.
Depending on the country standards, rice grades in the
market contain 5 to 25 percent of broken kernels (IRRI,
2006). Some uses of broken rice are described below.
Beer
Small broken rice or brewer’s rice is a valuable adjunct
in beer production, due to the low protein and lipid
content, which gives a natural aroma and flavour, and
produces a clear taste. Prior to use, it is important to ensure
that it is free of foreign seeds, insects, meld, soil and
traces of bran (which is rich in lipids) (Yoshizawa and
Kishi, 1985).
Fructose and glucose syrups
Fructose syrup can be made from broken rice using alpha-
amylase, gluco-amylase and glucose isomerase. A glucose
yield of 80 percent can be obtained from broken rice
(90 percent starch base); it is then converted to 50 percent
glucose, 42 percent fructose and 5 percent maltose.
Glucose syrup production is also reported using alpha-
amylase and gluco-amylase and giving a yield of
80 percent (Cheng and Chang, 1984). In both cases,
broken grains are subject to gelatinization of starch prior
to enzymatic hydrolysis.
Flour and pre-gelatinized rice flour
Broken grains can be milled into flours of different
granulations for domestic consumption. Likewise, pre-
gelatinized rice flour is produced by extrusion, pressure
or steam cooking of the broken grains which are then
ground into several types of pre-gelatinized rice flour
(Sheng, 1995).
Feed
Broken grains have been used in many rice-producing
countries for swine and poultry directly or in feed
formulations.
Starch
Starch from broken rice can be produced by wet-milling
with 0.3 to 0.5 percent of sodium hydroxide solution to
remove protein. The broken grains are steeped in alkaline
solution for 24 hours and then ground with the solution.
The batter is stored for 10 to 24 hours and filtered to
remove the fibre. The slurry is centrifuged to remove the
starch, which is then dried. The protein can be recovered
by washing and precipitation.
Maltodextrin
Maltodextrin can be made from rice flour by incubating
the substrate at 80°C using heat labile amylase (Griffin
and Brook, 1989).

Distilled liquors/spirits
Shochu is a Japanese liquor prepared by a non-cooking
saccharafication method using raw starch degraded by
enzymes from C. paradoxa, followed by fermentation and
distillation operations (Nishimura et al., 1993).
Rice hull
The availability of rice hulls varies from country to
country, depending on the type and size of the rice mills
and their locations. Larger rice mills have more disposal
problems with hulls compared to smaller village-type rice
mills. Some rice mills operate for only a few months of
the year, whereas others operate all year round. In most
rice mills, rice hulls are separated from husked rice via
aspiration, as rice hulls are lighter than husked rice.
Sometimes, hulls are ground prior to piling or storage.
Grinding makes it easier to transport hulls, reduces the
space needed for storage and lowers transportation costs.
Rice hull as animal feed
Rice hull may be used as an ingredient in ruminant feeds;
commercial feeds may contain 5 to 10 percent of ground
rice hulls. Chemical, physical and biological treatments
have been used to prepare rice hulls for feed:
• Physical processes include explosion-puffing at high
pressure.
• Chemical treatments include alkaline solutions to
increase digestibility of the dry matter.
• Biological treatment uses microorganisms and
fermentation processes to grow single cell protein
to increase protein and reduce fibre.
Of all cereal by-products, the rice hull has the lowest
percentage of total digestible nutrients; adding a source
of nitrogen can enhance hulls as feed. There are limi-
tations to the use of rice hull as feed, including: low diges-
tibility, peculiar size, low bulk density, high ash/silica
content and abrasive characteristics (IRRI, 2006). The
silica content of ash is 90 to 97 percent (Juliano, 1997).
Rice hull in agriculture uses
Rice yields can be improved with regular use of fertilizer
by addition of rice husk ash. Rice hull can also serve to
increase moisture retention or as a weed growth inhibitor
in the soil. When the rice hull is burned, the remaining
ash can be used as a mix for fertilizer or to neutralize
acid soils, as is the tradition in some Asian countries and
other countries where rice hull is used as a domestic fuel.
Finely-ground rice hulls are a component of commercial
mixed fertilizers. The rice hull prevents caking of other
fertilizer components. Worms can be used in rice hull
decomposition, as rice hulls can be difficult to compost.
Rice hull can also be used as substrate for seed germi-
nation, in crop growing and even in chicken hatchery to
make nests for incubating eggs.
Rice hull as fuel for direct combustion and gasification
Rice husks are much more economical than rice straw
for direct combustion. It is used for domestic fuel
consumption and can be used to make briquettes as it
improves the combustion characteristics and ease of
handling. In the modern rice-milling industry, rice hulls
are used as a fuel source for grain drying and parboiling.
In Thailand, rice is dried in high-temperature fluidized
bed dryers, and drying heat is provided by cyclonic rice
hull furnaces. In Bangladesh, rice hulls are the preferred
fuel for parboiling, and rice hulls are widely used for
grain drying in the larger rice mills of northern India.
The gasification of rice hulls to produce combustible
gas can have several objectives: direct combustion in
boilers or furnaces, combustion in internal combustion
engines, or production of cooking gas. Gas produced in
gasifiers for use in boilers and furnaces is a technically
and economically proven technology, and provides more
efficient energy conversion than direct combustion of rice
hulls. A limited number of small-scale rice hull gasifiers
(5-20 kW) are in use in northern India (IRRI, 2006).
Other industrial uses
Other industrial uses of rice hull add higher value than
agricultural uses to the products. Products that can be
developed from full utilization of the rice hull include:
concrete blocks, tiles and moulding, fireboard, ceramics,
road-building material, sugars, ethanol, furfural and
cement (Del Rosario, 1997). Rice hull ash (RHA)
(35 percent) mixed with Portland cement produces
compressive strength cement (DTI, 2006). Prices for RHA
on the world market are approximately US$200 per tonne
of ash (equivalent to US$40 per tonne of rice hulls, or
US$8 per tonne of rough rice). Using RHA in the cement
industry is also under consideration (IRRI, 2006).
CONSTRAINTS IN DEVELOPING THE RICE INDUSTRY
The paddy rice milling process and utilization of the main
derived products and by-products represents a good
alternative to rice farmers and partnerships in developing

countries for the promotion and development of the small
and medium rice industry to:
• add value and increase profitability;
• create employment opportunities; and
• make rice cost effective and in harmony with the
environment.
However, it is important to first analyse in detail the
technical and socio-economic aspects of the rice industry
in question.
Different types of industry can be derived from paddy
rice milling, operating in various areas:
• milled rice;
• rice processed products derived from milled rice;
• utilization of by-products; and
• paddy rice services industry (drying, parboiling, de-
husking etc.).
A wide range of processed rice products and by-products
can be obtained for human consumption as well as for
industrial use. There is potential for further development,
but improvement is required in terms of preparation,
packaging and machinery usage. A wide range of tasks
need to be performed, which means that such industries
can create employment opportunities for all family
members.
Experience in some Asian countries indicates that
home industry (1-4 workers) and small industry (15-
19 workers) at rural and village level are vital to the
national economy, despite the phenomenal growth of the
large-scale sector. Some governments encourage and
support the promotion of small-scale industries through
deliberate policies, for example: capital subsidies, prefer-
ential tax treatment and reservation of exclusive manu-
facture in the small-scale sector. In India, employment
generated from small and medium enterprises is
80 percent of the total amount for manufacturing
industries; in Japan and the Republic of Korea, it is 78 and
69 percent, respectively (Tamil Nadu, 2004).
In the small industry sector of developing countries,
studies have indicated that organized businesses may have
advantages over unorganized ones.
Constraints faced by small industries include (AGNET,
2006):
• insufficient supply of good quality raw material;
• lack of research activity at factory level;
• low level of technology;
• lack of adequate market strategies;
• inconsistent quality due to lack of facilities for
quality control;
• lack of small-scale industry associations;
• lack of food standards and regulations;
• low quality packaging;
• low level of education of entrepreneurs;
• lack of finance (a common problem);
• lack of skills in small business management; and
• poor policies and incentives to promote the agro-
industry sector.
CONCLUSIONS
• Rice product and by-product use in the development
of small and medium industries represents an
attractive technical and socio-economic challenge
to stakeholders in developing countries associated
with rice production, processing, research and
trading.
• SMEs for rice products and by-products represent
an opportunity for diversifying the food and non-
food industry, including rice service industries
(drying, parboiling etc.), and offer great potential
for increasing income and employment oppor-
tunities.
• Rice by-products which are likely to be econ-
omically feasible include: rice hull as a fuel source,
rice bran as a source of oil and broken grains as a
source of flour.
RECOMMENDATIONS
• Support should be provided for the development of
rice SMEs, especially in developing countries, in
order to implement and improve production
efficiency, quality control and safety conditions.
• Given that many products exist with the potential
to be industrialized, a preliminary feasibility study
should be carried out to facilitate implementation.
• In several countries, SMEs make a more significant
contribution to employment generation than do large
businesses; governments must, therefore, promote
them and help overcome constraints through policies
and strategies, including: transfer of innovative
technologies and regulations; financial subsidy or
assistance where possible; preferential tax treatment;
and the development of adequate infrastructure.
• Transfer of technologies and financial programmes
are required in order to improve the rural and village
rice industry in developing countries.

AGNET. 2006. Available at www.agnet.org/library/article/
eb409.html.
Bean, M.M. & Nishita, K.D. 1985. Rice flours for baking. In
B.O. Juliano, ed. Rice chemistry and technology, 2nd ed.,
p. 539-556. St Paul, MN, USA, Am. Assoc. Cereal Chem.
Calloway, D.H. 1995. Human nutrition: Food and
micronutrient relationship. Agricultural Strategies for
Micronutrient Working Paper 1. Washington, DC,
International Food Policy Research Institute.
Chang, P.Y. 1988. The utilization of rice in Taiwan,
Republic of China. Food Fert. Technol. Cent. Asian Pac.
Reg. Ext. Bull., 273: 1-9.
Chen, L. & Houston, D.F. 1970. Solubilization and recovery of
protein from defatted rice bran. Cereal Chem., 47(1): 72-79.
Cheng, W.P. & Chang, Y.C. 1984. Production of high
fructose, rice syrup and high protein rice flour from
broken rice. J. Sci. Food Agric., 35: 1128-1135.
Crampton, E.W. & Harris, L.E. 1969. Applied animal
nutrition (2nd ed.), San Francisco, W.H. Freeman & Co.
(Cited in Barber and Benedito de Barber, 1977)
Damardjati, D.S. 1995. Food processing in Indonesia: The
development of small-scale industries (available at
www.agnet.org/library/abstract/eb410.html).
Del Rosario, R.R. 1997. Rice by products in Asia. FAO-
RAP Publication No. 39.
DTI (Department of Trade and Industry). 2006. Available
at www.dti.gov.uk/renewables/publications/pdfs/
exp129.pdf.
Eggum, B.O., Juliano, B.O., Villareal, C.P. & Perez, C.M.
1984. Effect of treatment on composition and protein and
energy utilization of rice and mung bean in rats. Qual.
Plant. Plant Foods Hum. Nutr., 34: 261-272.
FAO. 2004. Available at www.fao.org/rice2004/en/f-sheet/
factsheet3.pdf.
FAOSTAT. 2006. FAO Statistical Database (available at
www.fao.org/faostat/).
Griffin, V.K. & Brook, J.R. 1989. Production of size
distribution of rice maltodextrins hydrolyzed from milled
rice flour using heat stable alpha-amylase. J. Food Sci.,
54: 190-193.
Hadiwigeno, S. 1997. Foreword. In Rice product in Asia,
p. i. FAO-RAP Publication. No. 38, Bangkok, Thailand.
Houston, D.F. & Mohammad, A. 1966. Air classification
sieving of rice bran and polish. Rice J., 69(8): 20-22, 44.
Hudson, C.A., Chui, M.M., & Knuckles, B.E. 1992.
Development and characteristics of high fibre muffin with
oat bran, rice bran or barely fibre fractions.
Ilag, L.L. & Juliano, B.O. 1982. Colonization and aflatoxin
formation by aspergillus spp on brown rice differing in
endosperm properties. J. Sci.Food Agric., 33: 97-102.
IRRI. 2006. Available at www.knowledgebank.irri.org.
Iwasaki, T. 1987. Measures for the enhancement of rice
consumption and diversification of rice utilization. Paper
presented at the International Seminar on the Diversification
of Rice Utilization, Bangkok, l2-17 Oct. 3 pp.
Juliano, B.O. 1997. Rice products in Asia. FAO-RAP
Publication No. 38.
Juliano, B.O. 1996. Grain quality problems in Asia. In B.R.
Champ, E. Higley & G.I. Johnson, eds. Grain drying in Asia,
p. 15-22. Proc. International Conference, FAO Bangkok,
Thailand, 17-20 Oct. 1995, Australian Centre for International
Agricultural Research. Canberra, Australia, ACIAR Proc. 71.
Juliano, B.O. (ed.). 1985. Rice: Chemistry and technology (2nd
ed.). St Paul, MN, American Association of Cereal Chemist.
Juliano, B.O. 1984. Rice starch: production, properties, and
uses. In R.L. Whistler, J.N. BeMiller & E.F. Paschall,
eds. Starch: chemistry and technology (2nd ed.), p. 507-
528. Orlando, FL, USA, Academic Press.
Juliano, B.O. & Sakurai, J. 1985. Miscellaneous rice
products. In B.O. Juliano, ed. Rice chemistry and
technology (2nd ed.), p. 569-618. St Paul, MN, American
Association of Cereal Chemist.
Juliano, B.O. & Perez, C.M. 1993. Critical moisture content
for fissures in rough rice. Cereal Chem., 70: 613-615.
Kennedy, G., Burlingame, B. & Nguyen, N. 2002.
Nutritional contribution of rice: impact of biotechnology
and biodiversity in rice consuming countries. Proc. 20th
Session of the International Rice Conference, Thailand,
Bangkok.
Kiriyama, S. & Morita, T. 1992. Preparation of highly
purified rice protein and its tumor preventive effect. Hissu
Aminosan Kenkyo, 136: 43-447 (Japan).
Kohlwey, D.F. 1992. The quest for the whole grain in rice
milling. Cereal Foods World, 37: 633-639.
Kunze, O.R. 1985. Effect of environment and variety on
milling qualities of rice. In Rice grain quality and marketing,
p. 37-47, Proc. International Rice Research Conference,
IRRI, 1-5 June 1985. Manila, Philippines, IRRI.
Lai, M.N., Chang, W.T.H. & Luh, B.S. 1980. Rice vinegar
fermentation. In B.S. Luh, ed. Rice: production and
utilization, p. 690-711. Westport, CT, AVI Publishing Co.
Nishimura, K., Kida, K., Nakagawa, M., Yahata, K. &
Sonoda, Y. 1993. Production of spirit from crushed rice
by non-cooking fermentation using a benchscale plant.
Process Biochem., 28(3):147-153.