Guidelines to rice production in Fiji

Guidelines to rice production in Fiji

by
Dr. Shahida Sarker Parul
TCDC Consultant
TCP/FIJ/3502

Subregional Office for the Pacific Islands
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Apia, 2017


Contents

A. RICE VARIETIES, SEED SORTING, GERMINATION... 1
Introduction to Rice Varieties in Fiji... 1
Sorting/Cleaning of rice seed... 1
Seed rate, Soaking and Incubation technique... 1
Cleaning of rice seed... 2
Seed sorting/Cleaning:... 2
Seed bed preparation and sowing seeds... 2
Land Preparation and transplanting... 3
B. NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT... 3
Fertilization Rice-Field:... 4
Fertilizer Computation... 4
Urea Application using LCC... 4
C. WEED MANAGEMENT... 5
D. WATER MANAGEMENT IN RICE SEED PRODUCTION... 6
E. INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM)... 6
Insect pest management: Leaf Roller... 8
Insect pest management: Gall midge... 8
Insect pest management: Rice Armyworm:... 9
Insect pest management: Brown Plant Hopper (BPH):... 9
Management of Rice Insect Pest... 9
F. SEED PRODUCTION (ISOLATION + ROGUING)... 10
Isolation distance for seed production... 10
Rouging for rice production... 10
G. YIELD COMPONENT, AND YIELD CALCULATION... 11
Yield component... 11
H. HARVESTING, THRESHING, CLEANING, DRYING & STORING... 13
I. COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS OF RICE CROP IN FIJI... 13

A. RICE VARIETIES, SEED SORTING, GERMINATION
A. RICE VARIETIES, SEED SORTING, GERMINATION
Introduction to Rice Varieties in Fiji
Sl#
Variety
Time of sowing
Duration
(days)
Yield
(t/h)
Ecology
Remark

Star
Jan-Feb
July-Aug

Wetland
Dry land
Most popular variety
Suitable for transplant condition but farmer practice as broadcast rice,
Bold grain
Jan-Feb
July-Aug

Wetland
Dry land
Suitable for transplant condition but farmer practice as broadcast rice,
NuiNui
Jan-Feb
July-Aug

Wetland
Dry land
Suitable for transplant condition but farmer practice as broadcast rice,

Uttam
Jan-Feb
July-Aug

2.5-3 Wetland
Dry land
Suitable for transplant condition but farmer practice as broadcast rice,
China Motka
Nov-Jan 160
2.5-3 Wetland
Dry seed+Pre-germinated seed, Broadcast
Japani
Nov-Jan 120
Wetland
Dry seed + Pre-germinated seed, Broadcast
Lal Jari
Jan-Feb
July-Aug

2-2.5 Wetland
Pre-germinated seed, Broadcast
Lakrdawe
Jan-Feb 145
2.5-3 Wetland
Pre-germinated seed Broadcast
Rawele
Jan-Feb 120
2.5-3 Wetland
Pre-germinated seed Broadcast
10 Ujarka Motka
Nov-Jan 165
3-3.5 Wetland
Dry+Pre-germinated seed, Broadcast, (Bold grain)
11 Thakur Ram
Jan-Feb 120
2-2.5 Wetland
Pre-germinated seed Broadcast
12 Kharapani
Jan-Feb 120
2.5-3 Wetland
Dry+Pre-germinated seed, Broadcast
13 Suba Dhan
Nov-Jan 145
Wetland
Dry+Pre-germinated seed, Broadcast
14 Pahela Japane Nov-Jan 120
3-3.5 Wetland
Dry+Pre-germinated seed, Broadcast
Sorting/Cleaning of rice seed
Stored seed sundried for one day and cleaned properly.
Cleaned and treated seed can prevent seed-borne diseases and ensure healthy seedling and good harvest.
Seed sorting: can be done in 3 ways
(1)
Winnowing: using a Kula or air current/fan
(2)
By hand: if small amount
(3)
By soaking in urea solution
Dissolve 1.5 kg urea in 40 liters of water
Soak seeds in the urea solution & stir to float unfilled, broken & diseased seeds
Remove floating poor seeds by hands/sieves
Wash seeds properly 3-4 times with clean water.

Clean seed will have bright appearance with no spots & lesions.

Seed rate, Soaking and Incubation technique
Seed Rate:
A. Broadcasting: About 60-70 kg ha-1 seed is needed
B. Furrow/ Line Sowing: 40-50 kg ha-1 seed is needed
C. Dibbling: About 30-40 kg ha-1 seed is needed

Seed Rate in seed bed: Transplanting
Seed Rate: 80 to 100 g/m2 (Can be transplanted 20 times more area)

A. Transplanting 20-25 kg seed/ha
Germination Test: Should be done before sowing
Can easily be done by soaking 24 hours soaked seeds on wet-news paper spreaded on a clay-pot
After 4/5 days - sprouted seeds are counted to get germination percentage of any seed lot.
Incubation of rice seed:
Soak a half-filled seed-sack in clean water for 24 hrs
Place the sack on top of a wooden platform in a shaded area and cover with rice straw to facilitate incubation
Turn the seed once after 24 hrs for aeration and reduce the inner-heat of the heap
Incubate until white "dots" observed
Incubation time: 48 hrs (varies with whether)
Normal seeding: Healthy, strong, vigorus
Abnormal seedling: without root, thin and diseased
Cleaning of rice seed
Stored seed sundried for one day and cleaned properly.
Cleaned and treated seed can prevent seed-borne diseases and ensure healthy seedling and good harvest.
Seed sorting/Cleaning:
Stored seed sundried for one day and cleaned & treated properly.
Cleaned and treated seed can prevent seed-borne diseases and ensure healthy seedling and good harvest.
Seed sorting: can be done in 3 ways
(1)
Winnowing: usining a Kula or air current/fan
(2)
By hand: if small amount
(3)
By soaking in urea solution a. Dissolve 1.5 kg urea in 40 litters of water b. Soak seeds in the urea solution & stir to float unfilled, broken & diseased seeds
c. Remove floating poor seeds by hands/sieves d. Wash seeds properly 3-4 times with clean water.
Clean seed will have bright appearance with no spots & lesions.

Seed sorting: can be done in 3 ways
(1)
Winnowing: using a Kula or air current/fan
(2)
By hand: if small amount
(3)
By soaking in urea solution
Dissolve 1.5 kg urea in 40 litters of water
Soak seeds in the urea solution & stir to float unfilled, broken & diseased seeds
Remove floating poor seeds by hands/sieves
Wash seeds properly 3-4 times with clean water.
Clean seed will have bright appearance with no spots & lesions.
Seed bed preparation and sowing seeds
Creating seed bed and sowing seed
Prepare raised bed 1-1.5 m wide with any convenient length
Level the bed properly

Keep 50 cm ally between beds for management
80-100 g seed m-2 is appropriate to get healthy seedling (One acre land can be sown by seedlings from 3-3.5 kg of cleaned, healthy seeds)
Seeds sown uniformly 5-7 hours after bed preparation.

Maintenance of seed bed
Medium fertile soil does not require fertilizers
Unfertile soil needs compost/cow-manure @ 2 kg m-2
If seedlings are found dull green, apply 7 g urea m-2
In case of sulfur deficiency add 10 gm gypsum m-2
Weeding is required for healthy growth of rice seedlings
Spray recommended insecticides as and when necessary.

Uprooting the seedlings: Irrigate bed before pulling to ensure minimize root damage.
Land Preparation and transplanting
Select appropriate land (Seed bed/Main land)
Free from flood
Free from shade
Near to an irrigation channel
Medium fertile land with clay-loam soil
Permits frequent and easy inspection

 Irrigate land 7 days before plowing to make soil soft & allow weed/unwanted rice seed germinated
 Plow land 4/5 times followed by laddering to make well puddled and uniform level
 Clean stubble after every laddering
 Good land preparation ensures: Homogenous stand by receiving equal nutrient & water and a strong initial start over weeds

Depth of planting: 2-3 cm
Spacing: Plant to plant: 20 - 30 cm

Line to line: 15 - 20 cm
 Plant only one seedling in a hill to ensure genetic purity (Seed plot)
 Plant 3-4 seedlings for grain production plot
 Fill the gap within 7 days in case of seedling mortality
B. NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT
B. NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT

Techniques of preserving and increasing of soil fertility:
Animal Liters as OM
Soil test based balance fertilizer use
Appropriate cropping pattern
Return crop residue to the soil
Make farmers aware about soil productivity

Fig: Integrated Nutrient Management (INM)
Fertilization Rice-Field
 1/3rd Urea and all other fertilizers should be applied at final land preparation.
 Rest 2/3rd urea should be applied in two top-dress.
Recommended Fertilizer (kg/ha):
Sl#
Variety
Urea TSP MoP
During Final Land preparation

China Motka 174 108 66
All TSP+MoP+1/3 Urea as
Basal Dose

Japani
174 108 66

Lal Jari
174 108 66

Lakrdawe
174 108 66

Rawele
174 108 66

Ujarka Motka 174 108 66

Thakur Ram 174 108 66

Kharapani
174 108 66

Suba Dhan
174 108 66

10 Pahela
Japane
174 108 66

Fertilizer Computation
To compute for the equivalent amount of fertilizer materials necessary to supply the corresponding amounts of nutrients the following formula is used.

RR X A
FM = - X 100

% nutrient of FM

Where,
FM = Fertilizer materials in kg

RR = Recommended rate in kg nutrient/ha.
Or

Recommended rate (kg nutrient/ha) X Area (ha)
Amount of fertilizer = - X 100

% nutrient in commercial fertilizer
Urea Application using LCC
N management is critical:

 Highly mobile and unstable in soil system
 Indigenous soil supply is also variable (even with in a plot varied)
 Application of N does not synchronize with plant demand
 Requirements by crops and losses from soil system are also high

Parameters for Urea application using LCC in Rice
Parameter
Wet season
Dry season
Transplanted
Direct seeded
Transplanted
Direct seeded
Critical LCC value
3.5
3.0
3.5
3.0
Start LCC measurement

Last LCC measurement
Booting stage
Booting stage
Interval of LCC measurement
10 days
5 days (if no need to use N)
10 days
5 days (if no need to use N)
Number of hills/field

Number of leaves/hill
1 (topmost fully expanded)
1 (topmost fully expanded)
Time of N application
Bellow critical value
(≥ 6 LCC reading out of 10)
Bellow critical value
(≥ 6 LCC reading out of 10)
Amount of Urea
(kg/h)

67 (170g)
Put the leaf under the shade of body during measurement
C. WEED MANAGEMENT
C. WEED MANAGEMENT
 Weeds deteriorate seed quality by sharing nutrient & water with rice plant and mixing seed with rice seed.
 Timing of weed control: keep weed free up to 30-40 DAT in dry season and 40-50
DAT in winter season.
Weed impacts following way:
 Compete with plants for sunlight, moisture & soil nutrients
 Act as alternate hosts for insects- pests/disease pests.
 Reduce fertilizer use efficiency
 Reduce efficiency of irrigation system
 Reduce quality and quantity of harvest.

Points to considered during weed management
 Stubble cleaning after every laddering can control weeds.
 Use of weed free seed
 Keep levees and irrigation canals free of weeds
 Keep tools and machinery clean
 Keep animal manure free of weed seed by proper decomposition
 Keep non-farm areas clean.
 Initial plowing buries weeds, allow germinate their seeds and decomposed by later plowings.

 Rotary weeding followed by a hand weeding for weeds closer to the rice hills.
 Weedicides are very effective in weed control
 Starting from transplanting to harvesting weed should be removed as and when seen in a seed plot.
D. WATER MANAGEMENT IN RICE SEED PRODUCTION
D. WATER MANAGEMENT IN RICE SEED PRODUCTION
Water management techniques
 Water stress from PI-early grain filling stage results under-weight grain
 Excess water after transplanting reduces tillering ability
 Too much water during grain filling reduces seed quality
 Irrigation water should be applied at 2-3 cm depth 3 days after transplanting (also control weed)
 At tillering stage, alternate wetting and drying techniques can be applied to save water.

Water should be drained out from seed plot 7 days before harvest
 Harvesting rain water: small pond of 2 m depth can facilitate 2/1 irrigation with stored rain water.
 Levee management: A 15 cm high levee can hold rain water and help to face occasional drought in main season.
E. INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM)
E. INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM)

A pest management system that uses all suitable techniques and methods in as compatible manner as possible and maintains the pest populations at levels below those causing
economic injury
IPM: a broad interdisciplinary approach is taken using scientific principles of crop protection to combine into a single cropping system a variety of management strategies and tactics to
reduce pest populations.

Objective:
 Conserve beneficial insects and other organisms
 Judicial use of chemical pesticides
 Reduce side effects and after effects of pesticide use
 Not allowing pests to active resistance or tolerance to pests
 Ensure ecological balance and pollution free environment
 Reduce production cost.

IPM involve combinations of control techniques to optimize pest according to local conditions. Components of IPM are:
Cultural
Mechanical
Biological
Chemical
Social, etc.
Total dependence upon any single control measure or management tactic will fail at times with devastating losses

1. CULTURAL CONTROLS
 Crop rotation: BPH prone areas jute can be inserted

 Polyculture: strip cropping, which again creates the habitat diversity favorable to natural control.
 Trap cropping: pickleworms will concentrate in squash planted near cucumbers, and the squash plants can be destroyed.
Appropriate cultural practices:
 Keeping field weed free
 Changing time of application and quantity of fertilizers.
 Excessive use of urea can increase pest intensity e.g., yellow stemborer, leaf roller etc. On the other hand application of urea can reduce thrips attack.
 Proper irrigation management: Flooding field can reduce swarming caterpillar whereas drying field can control caseworm.
 Proper spacing: Narrow spacing increases brown plant hopper incidence.

2. MECHANICAL CONTROL
 Perching: to aid insect feeding birds
 Light trapping: can attract moths and other insects
 Hand picking: picking of stem borer egg mass
 Plough down stubbles: can control stem borer
 Sweep netting: can control hispa
 Leaf clipping: Destroys eggs and grubs of rice hispa
 Scare birds: can control bird damage

3. BIOLOGICAL CONTROL

Host Plant Resistance: The property that enables a plant to avoid, tolerate or recover from injury by the insect population that would cause greater damage to
other plants of the same species (that doesn’t have the resistant property) under similar environmental condition.

Conserving beneficial animals by

Cultivating legume crops in levee

Placing straw in levee after harvest

Giving time to find out shelter by beneficial insects after harvest (not ploughing field immediately after harvest)

Perching for insect feeding birds

Avoid misuse/overuse of pesticide

Assessment of insect injury at economic threshold level:
Categories
Insect
ETL
Internal
Feeder:
Stem borer
3 female moths or egg mass/m2
10 – 15% dead heart upto maximum tillering stage
5% white head after maximum tillering stage
75 deadhearts in 20 hills or 2 adults or 2 egg-
masses/m²
Gall midge
5% Onion Shoot
Leaf
Feeders
Rice hispa
4 adults/hill or 35% damaged leaves
Whorl maggot
25% damaged leaves
Leaf roller
Caseworm
Swarming caterpillar
Grasshoppers
Long horned cricket

Categories
Insect
ETL
Leaf
Suckers
Green leafhopper 1 hopper/sweep and presence of Tungro virus occurred

Stem suckers
Brown plant hopper
2-4 gravid female or 10 nymph/hill are present in 50% hill. OR
1 hopper/tiller
Mealy bug more than 5% hills are damaged
Grain sucker
Rice bug
3 bugs or nymph/hill
Ear cutter
Ear Cutting caterpillar
No Insecticides

Insect pest management: Leaf Roller

Adult moths is light brown
Wings having dark brown stripes and spots
Larvae are yellow / yellowish green
Lay eggs singly on the leaf surface
The insect occurs in all rice season

Damage Symptoms

The larva forms a protective feeding chamber by folding a leaf blade together and glues it with silk strands and feed on leaf tissues.
Longitudinal white and transparent streaks on leaf blades are created

Management Practices
Destruction of moths by light trapping
Perching for predatory birds can reduce the population
Recommended insecticide should be applied at Economic Threshold Level (ETL):

25% damaged leaves

Insect pest management: Gall midge

An important pest of main season crop
The adult is about the size of a mosquito
Females have bright red abdomen males are darker
Adults lay eggs singly near the base of the plant

Damage Symptoms
Larvae feed inside growing point of the plant

© IRRI Publication
© IRRI Publication
© IRRI Publication
© IRRI Publication

Feeding stimulates leaf sheath to transform into gall known as onion shoot or silver shoot
Tillers with gall bear no panicles

Management Practices
Light Trapping
Recommended insecticide should be applied at ETL:
5% Onion Shoot

Insect pest management: Rice Armyworm
• The adult of ECC is medium sized pale brownish color
• Full grown larvae have four longitudinal black stripes
• Larvae cut rice panicles
• Incidence occur in T. Aman season

Damage Symptoms
• Young larvae eat rice leaves or grasses from the edges
• The insect is nocturnal in habit
• 5-6th instar larvae require large amount of food and become
gregarious.
• They cut ripe or half ripen rice panicles

Insect pest management: Brown Plant Hopper (BPH)
The adult hopper is brown colored
It may be long winged (macropterous or short-winged (brachypterous)
Both adult & nymph suck sap from the Stem
It is a serious pest of Rice
Damage Symptom
Nymphs are whitish and gradually tuning brown
Both adult and nymph crowded at the base of the rice plant and suck sap from stem
Direct feeding by a large number of hoppers cause the plants to dry up and is known as hopper burn
BPH transmit Grassy Stunt and Ragged stunt virus diseases
Control Measures
Light trapping
Using wider plant spacing
Draining out of water
Avoidance of top dressing of N fertilizer in endemic areas
Cultivation of early maturing varieties
Cultivation of BPH resistant variety (BRRI dhan 35)
Insecticide should be applied, if 2-4 gravid female or 10 nymph/hill are present in
50% hill.
Management of Rice Insect Pest
Cultural Control
Draining out of standing Water
Whorl maggot
Caseworm, BPH, WBPH
Flooding of field

Swarming caterpillar, Soil insects
Destruction of infested plants

Mealy bug

Early maturing variety

BPH, WBPH
Wider plant spacing

BPH, WBPH
Top dressing of N fertilizer

Thrips
Resistant variety

GLH, BPH, WBPH, Tungro
Light trap

All insects attracted to light
Collection & destruction

Stem borer of egg masses
By Sweep net

Hispa & all other insect
Burning of stubbles

Stem borer, ECC, Swarming caterpillar
Mechanical Control
Leaf clipping

Rice hispa (75-92% grubs can be removed)
Biological Control
Perching
Placing of branches in the field to provide perching site for predatory bird
Chemical Control

If necessary

INSECT
CONTROL MEASURES
Brown Plant
Hoppers
Spray basal portions of plants with – ORTHENE 75% a.i. - 1kg a.i. /ha or
20gm formulation/14 liters of water when spraying with knapsack sprayer or 75g/Mistblower.
Rice Armyworm
Spray DIPTEREX 80% W. P. 1.12kg a.i/ha or 28ml/14 liters of water when using a knapsack sprayer, and use 8ml in a Mist blower.
Rice Leaf Roller
Spray leaves with SEVIN 80% a.i 1kg a.i/ha or 17gm formulation/14 liters of water when using a knapsack sprayer and 50gm formulation/10
liters of water when using a mist blower.
CARBACIDE 85 (800g/kg Carbaryl WP) at 27 gms per 14 liters of water when using knapsack sprayer and 18 gms/10 liters water when using
mist blower. Spray every 2-3 week intervals.
F. SEED PRODUCTION (ISOLATION + ROGUING)
F. SEED PRODUCTION (ISOLATION + ROGUING)
Isolation distance for seed production
 Isolation distance: keeping seed production plot separate from other nearby varieties to prevent cross- pollination.
 Isolation distance is essential to maintain varietal purity.
 Although rice is a self-pollinated crop, cross pollination up to 5% may occur due to wind blow, insects etc.
 The larger the seed plot the less the danger of out-crossing
 What is the isolation distance for rice seed production?

3 meter
 The isolation distance is compulsory for seed producers if they wish their multiplied seeds certified by the appropriate authority.
Rouging for rice production
Removal of off-types plants is the most major aspect of rice seed production. It is essential to eradicate all off-types to stop deterioration of seed quality by cross pollination and mixture.
Points to be considered
1. Definition and importance of rouging
2. Concept, source and identifying characters of off-types
3. Time of rouging

Definition and importance of Rouging
Rouging means removal of off-types or mixtures. Rouging in seed production plot is extremely important as pollen from off-type plants can cause irreparable damage through cross-pollination.
Concept, source and identifying characters of off-types
Plants with heterogeneous characters in a seed production plots may be called off-types.
Sources of such off-types are volunteer plants from previous crop in seedbed/main field, natural out-crossing, mutation, minor genetic variation,
developmental variation, and mechanical mixtures during harvesting, threshing, drying, processing and packing.
Identifying characters of off-types: Off-types can be identified by observing the following characteristics of plants:
 Plant height: Plants taller and shorter than most of the population in the field.
 Plants with different color of leaves, sheaths, and straws
 Presence or absence of awns: if majority of plants are with awns then those without awns are off-types and vice versa.
 Panicle exertion: Plants with earlier or later panicle emergence are to be considered as off-types (only those with a flowering range 2-3 days should be kept).
 Angle of flag leaf: If erect flag leaf is dominant then horizontal and droopy leaves are off types.
 Size, shape, and color of grains: If most of the panicles have long grains then those with medium grains are off-types. If slender grains are dominant, then bold grains are off types
etc.
 Diseased or insect-damaged plant.
Time of rouging
Rouging should be made continuously over the whole growing season (as and when noticed off-types) with a special emphasis during the period of panicle emergence to early
seed development. Usually rouging is done during
Vegetative growth,

Flowering,
Post flowering and

Pre-harvest times.
G. YIELD COMPONENT, AND YIELD CALCULATION
G. YIELD COMPONENT, AND YIELD CALCULATION
Yield component
Rice production means the total rice harvested from a farm an area a country
Rice production can be increased in two ways:
1. Increase land area under rice cultivation (Horizontal/Extensive Expansion)
Increase rice yield (Vertical/Intensive Expansion)

Yield components:
Panicle # per unit area (usually per m2)
Spikelet # per panicle
Wt. of each individual grain (usually wt of 1000 grains calculated)
To increase rice yield, we need to increase the above components
For this - use of modern technology is necessary

No. of panicle
Rice variety
Duration
Production process
Right time of sowing/transplanting
Fertilizer management
Water management
Weed management
Soil nutrient management
Insect pest/disease management
No. of spikelet
Filled grain in each panicle
Total filled grains depends on ICM
Usually 15% unfilled grain remains with a panicle
Spikelet no. determined during booting stage
Abnormal weather (Extreme high & low temp) increase unfilled grain no.
Weight of rice grains
Usually calculated with 1000 grain weight
Depends on varietal characteristics
Usually variation is minimum within a variety
Depends on:
Nutrient management
Water management
Insect-pest/disease management
Abnormal weather

Calculating rice yield

= x kg

panicle #/m
 spikelet # per panicale  1000 grain wt (g)
Rice yield (m
) = -

panicle #/m
 spikelet # per panicale  1000 grain wt (kg)
Rice yield (m
)= -

1000 x 1000
x  10,000
Rice yield = -t/ha = x  10 t/ha
(wet grain)

H. HARVESTING, THRESHING, CLEANING, DRYING & STORING
H. HARVESTING, THRESHING, CLEANING, DRYING & STORING

Harvesting, threshing, cleaning and drying of rice seed
 Harvesting can be done when 80-90% grains found mature
 Small quantity seed may be threshed by leg on a canvas
 Big lot can be threshed using thresher machine with slow-run
 Seed should be dried under 5-6 low-intensive sunlight avoiding noon temperature
 Moisture content of seed must be maintained at or below 12%
 Half dried seed should be cleaned using kula or seed cleaner
 Final dried seeds again cleaned properly using Kula/cleaner
 Healthy seeds can be separated using sieve or grader machine.

Storing rice seed
 All storing materials should be kept on wooden slab
 Keep the seed of different varieties separately.
 Cleaned and sun-dried drum, poly-bag, earthen pot can be used.
 Earthen pots should be colored to make it air tight
 After seed filling, extra space of pot should be filled with sand/ash.
 An air-tight cover should be used for stored pot.

I. COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS OF RICE CROP IN FIJI
I. COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS OF RICE CROP IN FIJI

Classification of Costs:
There are two major categories of costs; namely fixed cost, and variable cost. The other costs, which we derive for better understanding our analysis, are cash cost, kind cost, total cost, marginal cost and
opportunity cost etc.

Total Cost (TC): The total cost is the sum of fixed and variable costs. Symbolically the total cost can be written as:

TC = FC + VC - (1)
Where,

TC = Total Cost

FC = Fixed Cost

VC = Variable Cost

Fixed Cost (FC): The cost, which is incurred even if no output is produced, is referred to as fixed cost.
The fixed cost is also known as sunk cost.

Variable Cost (VC): The variable cost is the cost that can vary with the change in output. Labor, fertilizer and insecticides etc. are the variable cost items.

Marginal Cost (MC): Marginal cost is the change in TC resulting from a unit increase in output.

Change in TC
MC = - - (2)
Change in output
100 – moisture content of wet grain
Wt of dry yield = -  yield of wet grain
(at 14% Moisture)
100 - Moisture of dry grain

Opportunity Cost (OC): The opportunity cost is the cost that sacrifices for other. The opportunity cost of family labor is the cost that can earn by selling out the labor to other’s
farm/non-farm activities.
Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR): It is the ratio between gross return (GR) and total cost (TC). A farmer can invest money as long as the BCR is equal to 1.

GR

BCR = -

- (3)

TC
Empirical Results of Costs and Returns Analysis for Rice Production
Table: Per acre costs and return of Rice cultivation in Fiji

Items
Main season DSR
TPR in Main season
Off season DSR
Cost of seedbed preparation

Production cost (Tk/acre)

Human labor

Family labour

Hired labour

Land preparation (Animal/Power tiller)

Fertilizer:

Urea

TSP

MP

Manure

Pesticide/insecticide

Seed

Irrigation cost

Land rent

Interest on operating capital

Total costs of production (Tk/acre)

Rice yield (Kg/acre)

Gross Return (Tk/acre)

Grain

Straw

Net cost of production (Tk/acre)

Net return (Tk/acre)

Gross margin (Tk/acre)

Per unit cost of production (Tk/kg)

BCR