Production guidelines for rice
Project: First Season-Long Training of
Trainers on Integrated Rice Crop
Management under the National Rice
Revitalization Programme of the Ministry of
Agriculture (TCP/FIJ/3502)
Technical Cooperation Programme with the Republic of Fiji

Rice varieties in Fiji
Improved Varieties.
MALEKA: Can be grown in poor soil (hill soils), and two crops/year
UTTAM: Suitable for both dryland/irrigated/wetland and two crops/year
DEEPAK: Suitable for problem soils (acid sulphate peat) & two crops/year
NUINUI: Suitable for irrigated & wetland and two crops/year
TOTOKA: Suited for irrigated/wetland and two crops/year
STAR: Popular variety and can be grown 3 crops/year under irrigation
Traditional Varieties:
CHINA MOTKA: Late maturing & low yielding variety, one crop/year
LAL MOTKA: Late maturing and low yielding, one crop/year
Planting method and seed rate
There are 2 planting seasons for rice: (1) Main Season (November to
January); and (2) Off Season (June to August). 3 main methods of planting:
Broadcasting – use of pre-germinated seeds. Seed @ 30 kg//acre
Transplanting – seeds are raised in beds & transplanted in main field 3-4 weeks after germination. Seed @ 15 kg/acre. Seedlings
are transplanted with 25-30 cm x 25-30 cm spacing with 3 to 4 seedlings per hill.
Drilling – suitable in dry land using drilling machines. Seed @ 36 kg/acre
Seed sorting/cleaning
Dissolve 1.5 kg urea/40 liters of water (check solution with an floating egg)
Soak seeds in urea solution & stir to float unfilled, broken & diseased seeds
Remove floating poor seeds by hands/sieves
Wash seeds properly 3-4 times with clean water
Good seed can contribute 10% more yield
Incubation
Soak a half-filled seed-sack in clean water for 24 hrs, place sack on a wooden platform in a shaded area, cover with rice
straw to facilitate incubation

Turn seeds once after 24 hrs. for aeration and reduce inner- heat of the heap
Incubate until white "dots" observed
Incubation time: 48 to 72 hrs. (Varies with whether)
Nursery and seeding
The seed bed is usually prepared 25 to 30 days before transplanting.
Plough & harrow field 2-3 times until the soil is thoroughly puddled and leveled
Construct raised beds 10 cm high and 1 – 1.5 m wide with convenient length.
Construct drainage canals of 40-50 cm between the seed beds
300-500 m2 seed bed can hold 35–45 kg of seeds with ≥80% germination
The amount can produce enough seedlings to transplant one hectare of field
Land preparation
Poor land preparation causes uneven growth and therefore uneven maturity
Response to fertilizer is also affected by improper land preparation
Fields need to be well levelled for proper water management.
Wetland Conditions
Land should be soaked thoroughly with water before ploughing begin.
Always each ploughing should be followed by 1/2 harrowing
Fields need to be leveled & puddled before transplanting/broadcasting is done
For good land preparation, two months period from first ploughing is essential
For virgin soil under irrigation - proper rotovation & puddling is essential
Dry land Conditions
Soil should be well tilled, clean trashes of grass, break clots into fine pieces

Fertilizer
Urea – 3 bags1/ha. To be applied in two splits, half at 3 weeks old, and the remaining half at PI stage for short duration variety
but in 3 splits for long duration variety. But for peat areas, urea should be reduced to half.
Muriate of Potash – 2 bags/ha. To be applied as basal (before planting).
Single Superphosphate – 1 bag/ha. To be applied as basal
(before planting).
Weed control:
Keep rice field weed free up to maximum tillering stage
Initial plowing buries weeds, allow germinate their seeds and decomposed by later plowings. Stubble cleaning after every laddering can control weeds.
Use weed-free seed and keep tools and machinery clean
Keep levees and irrigation canals, non-farm areas free of weeds
Weedicides are very effective in weed control:
o
Grasses/broadleaf weeds: spray Stam F34 (Propanil) @ 9-11 lit/ha at 3-4 leaf stage.
o
Broad leaf grasses: spray Rice Spray 70 (MCPA) @ 2-3 lit/ha at 5-6 weeks after sowing o
Grasses, broadleaf & sedges: Spray Basagran PL 2 (bentazon + propanil) @ 8-10 lit/ha at 3-4 leaf stage
Avoid rainfall up to 4-8 hours after spraying. Again, Field should be completely drained before application of chemicals and
flooded 3 days after spraying
Mechanical control of weeds by operating finger weeder at 15-20 days after sowing combined with one hand weeding was more
economical.
Water management
Water stress from PI-to early grain filling stage results sterile or under-weight grain
Excess water after transplanting reduces tillering ability
Irrigation water should be applied at 2-3 cm depth 3 days after transplanting
At tillering stage, alternate wetting and drying techniques can be applied
1 1 bag = 50 kg

Water should be drained out from seed plot 7 days before harvest
Small pond of 2 m depth can facilitate 2/1 irrigation with stored rain water.
A 15cm high bund can hold rain water and help to face occasional drought in main season.
Pest control
Brown Plant hopper (BPH): The adult hopper is brown colored - both adult & nymph suck sap from the stem. This is a serious pest of
Rice in Fiji. The effect on the plants is rapid wilting and in severe outbreaks, the whole field of rice may be destroyed (hopper burn).
Need regular monitoring starting from active tillering stage and if
2-4 gravid female or 10 nymph/hill are present in 50% hill – OR 1 hopper/tiller is found - insecticide should be applied.
Control: MIPC (Liquid Form) – 48 mls per 14 lts of water.
MIPC (Powder Form)- 20gms per 14 lts of water.
BPMC – 25mls per 14lts of water.
Spray at 2 to 3 weeks interval at the basal portions of plants.
BPH sucking sap from rice stem
Hopper burn
Rice Leaf rollers: Adult moths is light brown in color and wings have dark brown stripes and spots. Larvae are yellow / yellowish green.
Lay eggs singly on the leaf surface. The caterpillar of the moth damages the plants by rolling the leaves and feeding on the green
tissues. The pest is capable of causing a great reduction in yield if not controlled.

Adult Moth
Caterpillar is rolling leaf
Damaged leaf
Control: If 25% leaves damaged - spray leaves with
Carbaryl – 17gms per 14lts of water.
Dicidex – 28gms per 14lts of water.
Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
IPM involves combinations of control techniques to optimize pest according to local conditions:
Crop rotation: BPH prone areas vegetables/sugar cane can be inserted
Keeping field weed free
Proper spacing: Narrow spacing increases brown plant hopper incidence.
Perching: to aid insect feeding birds
Scare birds: can control bird damage
Light trapping: can attract moths and other insects
Hand picking: picking of stem borer egg mass
Plough down stubbles: can control stem borer
Cultivating legume crops in levee
Placing straw in levee after harvest to get shelter of beneficial insects
As last measure with insecticide (Granular, liquid, powder): only when other control measure fails. If applied proper rate & dose
must be maintained.
Maturity and post-harvest
Harvesting can be done when 80-90% grains found mature
(straw-color)
Grain may be threshed by leg on a canvas or using thresher machine
Clean extra stubbles before drying

3-5 days sundry can remove some moisture from grain before storing
Moisture content of stored grain (food/seed) must be maintained
≤12%
Sun-dried grains need to be cool and then stored properly.
Storing materials should be kept on wooden slab
Keep different varieties separately.
References
1.
K. Srinivasa Rao, S. V. Subbaiah, M. Nacola, Kamlesh Puran, Ram
Pratap, BasDeo Lal, Epeli Tikoi Delai and Rajendra Reddy
2007,Cultivation Techniques to enhance rice production in Fiji, Rice
Production Technology Bulletin, Research Division, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forests, Republic of Fiji Islands, 32 pp
2.
BRRI 2015. Modern Rice Cultivation. 18th Edition. 80p.
3.
Rice Production Manual, Los Baños (Philippines): International Rice
Research Institute. http://www.knowledgebank.irri.org/images/docs/12-
Steps-Required-for-Successful-Rice-Production.pdf
4.
Northern Division Rice Survey Report. 2013. Ministry of Agriculture.
Republic of Fiji. 14p.
5.
A. J. Vernon. Rice Research in Fiji: 1960-1970. Fiji. agric. J.(1972) 34, 61-
70p.
6.
Ricepedia – the online authority of rice. CGIAR. Research program on rice-Global rice science partnership. http://ricepedia.org/rice-as-a-
plant/growth-phases
Report consulted (collected from Ministry of Agriculture, Republic of Fiji)
1.
COMMODITY PROFILE: A report produced by Ministry of Agriculture,
Republic of Fiji
2.
FERTILIZER SITUATION IN FIJI – A report collected from Ministry of
Agriculture
3.
REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES FOR RICE PRODUCTION
ENHANCEMENT IN THE REPUBLIC OF FIJI ISLANDS. By Md. Sirajul
Islam, PhD, Consultant, FAO-UN, submitted to Republic of the Fiji
Islands, Under TCP/FIJ/3201
4.
RICE AS AN INDUSTRY IN FIJI – A draft report collected from Ministry