Direct Seeded 
Rice (DSR) 
Technology

Nadeem Akber and Zubair Aslam
Department of Agronomy, 
University of Agriculture, Faisalabad
Rice transplanting is the conventionally used method in rice growing 
countries of Asia especially Pakistan. But it is no more cost-eﬀective 
because of water scarcity, unavailability of labor and high cost of 
production. Transplanting technique has to be replaced with a 
resource eﬃcient, economical and productive method of sowing 
without compromising the yield and net production to ensure the 
food security in future. Direct Seeded Rice (DSR) in place of the 
traditional transplanted rice is a way to reduce labor charges for nursery raising, puddling and 
transplanting. DSR is sown directly into the moist soil like wheat, corn or cotton and does not need 
continuous submergence so it reduces overall water requirement. 
Advantages of DSR:
·
Labor saving up to 75%
·
Water saving up to 30%
·
Early maturity of crop
·
Timely sowing of wheat crop
·
Saving of machinery operations (needed for puddling)
·
Avoids compaction of soil due to puddling
·
Good precursor of zero tillage technology

Production Technology:
The land should be prepared to produce a leveled seedbed with öne tilth free of weeds. Fine seed bed 
ensures better yield because of good germination and crop stand, root proliferation, fertilizer eﬃciency. 
Planting Techniques and Seed Rates:
Sowing is done in moist soils or in dry soil (immediately irrigated) with a speciöcally designed DSR drill 
and calibrated to deliver desired seed quantity keeping 9ʺ row spacing. Seed should be moistened in 
water for overnight to hasten germination. Soaked seed should, however, be dried in shade to avoid 
stickiness of wet seed for drilling. Soaking of seed with fungicide eliminates or reduces seed borne and 
soil-borne diseases. The seed rate for direct seeding of öne grain rice varieties should be 16-18 kg and 
for coarse varieties 14-16 kg per acre. Seed should be sown 2-3cm deep for good crop stand as placing 
seed deeper will result in poor emergence. 
Sowing Time: 
The best planting time for DSR is from end of June to early July. This, coupled with the fact that DSR 
matures 10-12 days earlier, enables early planting of the following wheat crop. Seeding too early causes 
crop sterility due to high temperature at anthesis.
Fertilizer Application: 
Optimum quantity of fertilizer needed depends on the nutritional status of the öelds; however, a 
generalized recommendation of fertilizer use consists of 2.5 bags urea, 2 bags DAP and 1 bag 
rd
potassium sulphate. All P and K, 1/3 of N should be drilled along with the seed; the remaining N can be 
rd
rd
applied in two splits; 1/3 after 25 days of sowing and 1/3 after 40-45 days. In areas where zinc 
deöciency occurs zinc must be applied as zinc sulphate (35% Zn) @ 5 kg/acre.
Irrigation Management: 
Irrigation is critical in DSR especially at earlier stages. Soil must be kept moist for the örst 12 days to 
ensure complete germination. First irrigation should be applied a days after sowing followed by pre-
st
emergence weedicides one day after 1 irrigation. If, however, heavy soaking dose is applied örst 
irrigation can be delayed until after emergence. In that case herbicide application should be done in the 
evening after sowing. DSR crop does not require continuous submergence and can be safely irrigated 
when hairline cracks appear on the soil. Moisture stress should be avoided at tillering, panicle initiation, 
and grain ölling stages which are crucial for obtaining higher yields. At these stages it is advisable to 
keep öelds øooded. The last irrigation should be applied 20 days before harvesting. DSR is an aerobic 
rice production and may show iron deöciency symptoms in some soils. Flooding or submerging the 
öeld corrects these symptoms.
Major weeds of DSR:
In Pakistan, the major DSR weeds are bermuda grass (Cynodon dactylon L.), climbing dayøower, jungle 
rice, purple nut sedge, egyptian grass, bulrushrice, small øower umbrella plant, øat sedge and most 
importantly horse-purslane (Trianthema portulacastrum L.). In many cases, horse-purslane even has led 
to complete failure of DSR crop.
Table 1. Suggested Herbicide Applications
Weedicide 
Dose (a.i. ha-1) 
Application time 
Glyphosate 
1 g 
Pre-plant 
Pendimethalin 
1000 g 
Pre-emergence 
Pyrazosulfuron 
30 g 
Pre-emergence 
Ethoxysulfuron 
30 g 
Post-emergence 
Fenoxaprop-p-ethyl 
937 g 
Post-emergence 
 
Weed control
There are many methods to control the weeds in crops, however, chemical control is the most 
commonly used and reliable method for controlling weeds in rice. Herbicide application oﬀers an 
economical and practical approach towards weed management. An integrated approach of controlling 
weeds in DSR can be adopted as sometimes single use of herbicides has been found to be unable to 
control a broad spectrum of weeds. It might control only a speciöc species of weeds. Thus application of 
more than one herbicide seems to be a better option. But some diﬃculty is coupled with the use of pre-
emergence herbicides such as their narrow application duration (0–5 DAS) and prerequisite of ample 
soil moisture at the time of their application. In such situations, post-emergence herbicides are superior.
The need is to provide information and consultancy to farmer community regarding this technology 
because an economically good management of DSR öelds requires a strong practical and theoretical 
understanding of agronomic practices.